Title: Barnstable County Entomologist Breaks Down Tick Risks, Offers Safety Tips
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-10T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/regional_news/barnstable-county-entomologist-breaks-down-tick-risks-offers-safety-tips/article_e6312311-d599-45f8-b868-a86e9c7fbade.html

Tick exposure is highest during the spring and summer months and again in the mid- to late fall, with emergency room visits related to tick bites on Cape Cod typically spiking in June and July, Barnstable County entomologist Escher Cattle said during a presentation to the Barnstable County Board of Regional Commissioners and the Bourne Select Board on June 29.

In addition to his work on tick-borne disease prevention alongside the Barnstable County Department of Health and Environment, and with the tick-borne disease prevention staff on Martha’s Vineyard, and other local and state experts and organizations, Cattle works on entomology and horticulture programs, including the master gardener program, through Cape Cod Cooperative Extension.

Noting that “we can’t say for sure that it’s a better or worse tick disease year, until it’s already over,” Cattle began his presentation with a review of 2025.

With the Northeast experiencing a record number of emergency room visits for tick bites since 2011, Cattle said Barnstable County followed that trend, seeing an increase in emergency room visits in 2025 compared to previous years. However, he noted that cases of tick-borne diseases “remain about average for the season with a higher frequency in the fall when nymphal deer ticks molt into adults and resume the search for hosts to feed on.”

Compared to 2025, emergency room visits due to tick bites have increased by 65% this year, with 140 visits recorded between the end of December and late June 2026, compared to 91 visits during the same period in 2025, Cattle said. He added that May of this year also saw “heavier caseloads of Lyme disease, babesiosis and anaplasmosis” compared to May 2025.

“Keep in mind that the data we have on tick encounters is based only on human visits and the number of tick encounters in pets and people who remove ticks from home may be higher,” Cattle said, emphasizing that passive forms of tick surveillance are not fully able to “capture the whole picture.”

A major concern following a tick bite is the potential exposure to a tick-borne disease. Cattle said symptoms may “present weeks after the initial tick exposure.”

The following tick-borne diseases, ranging from common to rare but present, have been observed on Cape Cod: Lyme disease, babesiosis, anaplasmosis, Borrelia miyamotoi, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, tularemia, ehrlichiosis, and Powassan virus.

Alpha-gal syndrome is another tick-borne disease found on the Cape and became a reportable condition in Massachusetts on April 1.

“This means that new and preexisting cases will be recorded to help agencies track where it is happening most and how it’s affecting residents in that area,” Cattle said. “Less than five new suspected cases of alpha gal syndrome have been reported since the beginning of April.”

Cattle explained that “alpha gal syndrome is the triggering of an allergy to the carbohydrate galactose alpha 13 galactose [a-gal or alpha gal] via the bite of a tick,” with the lone star tick serving as the carrier in the Northeast. Present during every stage of a tick’s life cycle, alpha gal is part of the tick’s saliva.

Because alpha gal is found in “products derived from mammals,” the immune response triggered by a tick bite may result in “a delayed reaction to interactions with mammalian meat, dairy, gelatin, cosmetics and other personal care products and even medications and vaccines in severe cases.”

In some cases, symptoms could occur after exposure “to mammalian-derived products like wool, leather, lanolin or scent volatiles from mammalian meat cooking nearby,” Cattle said. Reactions may also occur from “the common food additive carrageenan, derived from algae,” because it may contain alpha-gal.

Cattle said alpha-gal syndrome features a double delay: the weeks to months between a tick bite and the appearance of symptoms, and the hours between exposure to an allergen and the resulting reaction.

A “hallmark” of the syndrome is that “it is consistent in its inconsistency,” Cattle said. “Case symptoms differ between individuals as well as between exposures, and they do not occur after every exposure or follow an obvious pattern.”

Reactions vary, with 60% of people experiencing anaphylactic reactions and 30% to 40% experiencing cardiac symptoms, including blood pressure drops, faintness, dizziness, breathing issues, tachycardia, skin issues and gastrointestinal symptoms.

The diagnosis process may take weeks to months. “Forty-two percent of doctors in the US are unfamiliar with the condition,” Cattle noted. Since there is no test for alpha gal itself, diagnosis may involve “a serological test for immunoglobulins to alpha gal,” along with an elimination diet or review of symptoms.

Cattle said alpha-gal syndrome can be long-lasting, particularly when a person experiences repeated tick bites. Treatment may include antihistamines or EpiPens.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has stated that “alpha gal is likely the 10th most common allergen in the US at this time,” Cattle said. He added that a bill introduced in the U.S. House of Representatives would classify alpha gal as a major allergen and require products containing it to disclose that information.

Hunting Season Extension Tried

On the state level, Governor Maura T. Healey introduced provisions to expand the hunting season as a way to control the tick population, since white-tailed deer are common hosts. “A reduction in host population would help reduce the numbers of ticks that the environment can support,” Cattle stated.

However, after the state House of Representatives removed the provision, Cattle said supporters can contact their local representatives to express their views.

“Deer hunting and culling are divisive issues in integrated tick management,” Cattle said. “It’s difficult to get the uninitiated on board with the idea of selectively and actively removing nature from our environment.”

Ongoing research on Martha’s Vineyard and Nantucket is focused on root-cause tick control and could provide “further public legitimacy to broader scale ecological management techniques,” Cattle said.

He added that continued efforts to increase tick surveillance and expand education and outreach programs will help inform residents.

Cattle highlighted the county’s “Take a Hike” informational campaign, which includes bifold cards explaining what to do after a tick bite, tick species and life stages, seasonal patterns, and how to avoid, locate and remove ticks. The cards were initially available in English, Portuguese and Spanish and have since expanded to include Haitian Creole and French.

Cattle said he also responds to inquiries, identifies ticks through photos or physical specimens, and provides information about tick disease testing.

From 2021 to 2025, the county partnered with MedZu Tick Report to provide subsidized testing services for county residents. The program offered free panel testing and expanded panel services at a reduced cost, Cattle said.

Funding for the service ran out early this year after “staunch public support of the program depleted those funds within a week,” Cattle said. With panel testing costing $60 and expanded panel testing costing between $100 and $200, he said he hopes to “get financial assistance to continue testing in the future.”

Cattle added that he hopes to eventually offer office hours where residents can visit him to have clothing or gear treated with permethrin to repel ticks, and receive shower cards, hand mirrors and lint rollers in the new fiscal year.

Cattle can be contacted at the Cape Cod Cooperative Extension’s office at 1358 MA-28 in South Yarmouth, by email at escher.cattle@capecod.gov or by calling 508-776-5685.

More information can be found at capecod.gov/departments/cooperative-extension/programs/ticks-bugs .
