Title: Barry Johnson Receives Citation From Barnstable County Commissioners
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-01T13:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/barry-johnson-receives-citation-from-barnstable-county-commissioners/article_b9510cab-3d3c-4289-9870-9dbff1b82f68.html

Barry H. Johnson received a citation recognizing his more than 50-year public service career at a joint meeting between the Barnstable County Board of Regional Commissioners and the Bourne Select Board on Monday , June 29 .

County Commissioner Ronald Bergstrom read the citation aloud, showcasing Johnson’s service in various capacities throughout the years.

While serving on the Bourne Select Board from 1972 through 1984, Johnson was appointed to represent Bourne on the Cape Cod Planning and Economic Development Commission and the Barnstable County Finance Advisory Board.

He became the Barnstable County Administrator of the Cape Cod Regional Government in 1988 and continued in that role through the 1990s.

In addition to serving the Town of Bourne as Town Clerk since 2003, he is also the chairman of both the Bourne Open Space Committee and the Community Preservation Committee and is general manager of the Bourne Recreation Authority.

The room filled with applause as soon as the citation was read in full.

After Commissioner Sheila Lyons made a motion to approve the execution of the citation, which was seconded by Bergstrom, all three commissioners—Bergstrom, Lyons and Mark Forest—voted affirmative.

Forest shared his personal appreciation for Johnson’s mentorship, as he reflected on the support Johnson provided early on in his career as Provincetown assistant town manager.

“Barry was the go-to person for me as a young administrator trying to understand the ways of Cape Cod and municipal government,” he said. Sharing how he sometimes refers to Johnson as “Mr. County” or “Mr. Bourne,” Forest added that “Barry was the one person that understood county government probably better than anybody on the county scene.”

Sharing her appreciation for Johnson’s decades-long efforts, Lyons also suggested a collaboration in which Johnson shares his wealth of knowledge about the county’s government and history.

Bergstrom emphasized Johnson’s role in implementing the current structure of Barnstable County’s government.

Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti shared her appreciation for Johnson’s acceptance: “He encouraged me from the day I got elected and allowed me to feel capable of doing this job.”

Ferretti also emphasized Johnson’s historical knowledge as she pointed out his in-depth understanding of the Wampanoag Tribe’s history.

“He’s a real staple in this community,” Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian said, adding that since her first experience serving the town as library trustee, Johnson has been a source of encouragement and support. “He’s been a mentor to a lot of people. He certainly knows a lot.”

Select Board member Jeanne L. Azarovitz reflected on how Johnson also served as a mentor to her. He has “been there for everybody: townwide, countywide” and has an “amazing history of the town,” she added.

Johnson “is a shining example of people dedicating their lives to make their community a better place,” Select Board clerk Mary Jane Mastrangelo said, adding that she had first met him when she was on the Finance Committee.

Select Board member Peter J. Meier described Johnson as “the perfect example of a public servant.” Meier shared that since he was a child, he has known Johnson, since his mother worked as a town employee. He added that since getting involved in local politics in the mid-1990s, he still visits Johnson to talk back and forth about various topics, during which he sometimes receives “constructive criticism.”

Emphasizing the importance of institutional knowledge, which Johnson has, Meier stated, “We have a chance to soak it up like a sponge and document it all down.”

“I guess when you reach 82, I guess you get to a point where you just keep going,” Johnson said as he spoke at the podium to accept the citation.

He then thanked the County Commissioners, the Bourne Select Board and Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem, as well as previous coworkers Eleanor McGaughlin and Mary LeClair, for their support.

Johnson also introduced Elizabeth Gazerro, the town’s new assistant town clerk. “We are very pleased to have her.”

“I don’t know how to say thank you to all of you here,” Johnson said. “Thank you so so much.”

After the group posed for a photo, Johnson told Gazerro, “Come on, Elizabeth; we’ve got to go to work.”
