Title: Big Brother Big Sister Matches Celebrate Year of Mentorship
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-06-05T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/big-brother-big-sister-matches-celebrate-year-of-mentorship/article_549c14f8-9f33-4000-9f68-f1b16a756660.html

Big Brother Big Sister duos celebrated the relationships they formed through the youth-mentorship program this year during a graduation ceremony held at Massachusetts Maritime Academy (MMA) on Wednesday , June 3 . An additional ceremony was held on Thursday , June 4 .

The partnership between the Big Brother Big Sisters of Cape Cod & the Islands and MMA began 13 years ago, said JR Mell, regional director of Big Brother Big Sisters of Cape Cod & the Islands. He noted that over those years the program has expanded, having first started with 10 kids from James F. Peebles Elementary School in Bourne and developing to include students from Bourne Intermediate School, Bourne Middle School and Plymouth and Wareham public schools.

The Big Brother Big Sister organization aims to foster supportive relationships between young adult mentors and youth facing hardship.

Through the campus-based program, cadets serve as “Bigs” and mentor younger children known as “Littles” from schools in the region. Mell noted that over the years, he has now seen five Littles in the program come back to serve as Bigs.

As each duo was named, the mess hall filled with applause as they each accepted gift bags filled with MMA and Big Brother Big Sister merchandise, as well as a photo of each respective pair. Out of the nearly 70 total Big and Little matches, seven Bigs—or cadets—are also graduating from MMA. In addition to the gift bag, those seven Bigs received a certificate to recognize their achievement.

Kelcie Hornedo, a Big Brother Big Sister match coordinator, explained that earlier in the year, she had organized an activity for each duo to write an acrostic poem on a gift bag to describe their respective partners using adjectives that correlate with the letters of their names. In addition to organizing a variety of activities, Hornedo also focuses on ensuring that Bigs and Littles feel supported and are happy and healthy.

Matches are made in early October and last until the end of the school year in June. Once the Big Brother Big Sister enrollment team conducts interviews in order to make intentional matches, a meeting between the Big and Little helps get the match started. Similar interests also play a role in making a match.

Meeting on the MMA campus weekly on Wednesday or Thursday over the course of the school year, the Littles are also exposed to the potential of enrolling in higher education, Mell said.

The weekly meetings also offer an opportunity for matches to enjoy activities around campus.

Lily Novak of Framingham, a Big, and Layla Doonan, 11, of Wareham, a Little, have been paired together for the past three years.

Novak noted that they share the same interests and enjoy the same crafts, with Layla adding that her favorite pastimes with Novak include being outside, being at the beach, and fishing.

Currently completing her junior year, Novak shared that she plans on being a Big again next year. She noted the fun she has talking with Layla, and how that offers a “break from the seriousness” of university.

Novak was also recognized at the ceremony for her additional assistance with the program, as she was one of two Bigs who acted as liaisons between the Big Brother Big Sister program team and the other Bigs.

Nolan Sherry, a Big from Madison, Connecticut, and his Little, Ethan Chun, 11, of Wareham, shared how they both learned a lot from each other.

Describing Ethan as smart, Sherry shared how Ethan has built a catapult. Sherry also noted how he learns a lot about the younger generation from Ethan, and he enjoys learning how Ethan thinks and about what is going on in his life.

Ethan shared how he has enjoyed talking to older people, like Sherry, because he is able to learn more and develop himself.

They both shared how they enjoy going to the gym or playing outside.

A graduating senior, Sherry said he will miss the community. However, the bond between Bigs and Littles has the capacity to extend past the program and graduation, he said. Having been paired together as Big and Little for the past three years, Sherry shared how Ethan’s family has invited him to go boating.

There is a “potential to form those lifelong connections,” Mell noted.

Throughout the ceremony, Mell, Hornedo and Rear Admiral Francis X. McDonald, the president of MMA, all stated their appreciation for everyone involved in the program, ranging from the Bigs and Littles and their families to the Big Brother Big Sister staff members and participating schools.

Noting that a photo of every previous cohort hangs in the Big Brother Big Sister office, Mell invited everyone to pose for a group photo. Once that was complete, everyone eagerly circled around a table full of cupcakes in celebration of the past year, with Littles already asking when the program would start again next year.
