Title: Bill Authorizing New Fire Station Borrowing Passes Legislature, Needs Governor's Signature
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-03-18T11:45:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bill-authorizing-new-fire-station-borrowing-passes-legislature-needs-governors-signature/article_1f8c3049-f361-4a8d-af32-176257105af9.html

The Town of Bourne is getting closer to being able to borrow funds for the south side fire station, slated to replace the now-closed Pocasset station on Barlows Landing Road and the temporary quarters on Thomas Philbrick Road in Monument Beach.

Special legislation—H. 4763, An Act validating the results of the annual election held in the Town of Bourne on May 20, 2025—passed the House and Senate. It now sits on Governor Maura T. Healey’s desk and will take immediate effect upon the governor’s signature, as it was filed as an emergency law.

During last May’s Town Meeting and town election, residents voted in favor of authorizing the town to borrow $18.8 million to cover the cost of building a new fire station south of the Cape Cod Canal at 171 Clay Pond Road.

The Bourne Select Board had written a letter to Healey’s office requesting that the special legislation be filed at the State House after an issue arose with the ballot question seeking authorization to borrow those funds.

The improper posting was uncovered last fall when Bourne Finance Director Erica M. Flemming initially began preparing to borrow. Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem said the plan was to go out for borrowing in January, but Flemming started preparations in September.

McCollem added that Town Counsel Bryan F. Bertram alerted the town to the election warrant problem.

Due to the improper posting, those election results were invalid. The result of which being that Flemming is unable to borrow to cover the costs of construction until the issue is resolved. Additionally, Flemming’s inability to borrow means that McCollem cannot legally sign any contracts “knowing we don’t have the money.”

Having passed both chambers of the Legislature, the bill would be officially validated by the governor’s signature, thereby confirming the election results.

Healey’s office confirmed with McCollem on Monday , March 16, that the bill arrived at the governor’s desk and will undergo review by the office’s legal team. Healey’s staff added that updates will be provided as the process continues.

“It is looking like we will be able to resolve this prior to the last day to submit ballot questions, which is April 14,” McCollem told the Select Board at its meeting on Tuesday , March 17 . “As soon as Erica [Flemming] receives something official, signed and sealed, then we can move forward with getting the financial interest in place.”

“We’re very hopeful, but we’re not over the finish line yet,” she added, noting that, as a failsafe in case an issue were to arise, a Select Board meeting is penciled in before that deadline.

Select Board member Peter J. Meier stated his appreciation towards the legislative delegation’s assistance in passing the bill in the State House, noting “it’s progress…We just have to wait for what happens next.”

“It’s in the town’s best interest to get this done,” he added. “It will only make the community that much safer on that side of the bridge by getting a new station.”

Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti echoed Meier’s sentiment towards the state legislators.

In a press release, state Senator Dylan A. Fernandes (D-Plymouth & Barnstable) and state Representatives Steven G. Xiarhos (R-5th Barnstable) and David T. Vieira (R-3rd Barnstable) noted the collaboration between the town and the state.

“The voters of Bourne made their voices clear when they approved funding for a new fire station that will strengthen emergency response and public safety south of the Canal,” Fernandes said in a press release. “I’m grateful to Governor Maura Healey for filing this legislation and to my colleagues in the Legislature for joining with us to quickly act to ensure the will of Bourne voters is respected and that the town can move forward with the South Side Fire Station project.”

Xiarhos shared a similar sentiment in the press release: “Proud to join my Bourne colleagues in moving this bill and critical project forward, giving our firefighters the modern and safe home they deserve while protecting our community every day.”

“I want to thank Governor Healey for working with my office to file this home rule legislation on behalf of Bourne to ratify the May 20, 2025, town election after a minor paperwork error was found in the election documentation. Bourne officials have worked tirelessly over many years to move the South Side Fire Station project forward, and I am pleased we were able to fix this technical glitch,” Vieira.

“Many thanks to the bipartisan efforts of Senator Fernandes and Representative Xiarhos getting this over the finish line,” he added.

McCollem stated her appreciation for the efforts of the legislators to pass the special legislation in the press release.
