Title: Bourne Selected For Living Shorelines Project To Restore Salt Marsh
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-06-05T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-selected-for-living-shorelines-project-to-restore-salt-marsh/article_173febe8-ee0d-4228-af3f-bb78b73ff351.html

The Nature Conservancy recently selected Bourne as one of three towns in Massachusetts to participate in an inaugural living shorelines planning series to restore approximately 1,000 square feet of salt marsh located in Monks Park.

Located at 0 Shore Road in Pocasset, Monks Park includes trails within the woods and along the coast that feature views of Buzzards Bay and is used for shellfishing and recreationally for beachgoing, with parking located on Valley Bars Road.

“The public location of this project will also provide an opportunity for Bourne residents to see the benefits of restoration in real-time,” Bourne Conservation Agent Stephanie M. Fitch said in an email to the Enterprise on Wednesday , June 3 .

“The town is dedicating time to designing and implementing a living shoreline in this location because salt marshes provide flood control, reduce coastal erosion, and prevent pollution by filtering stormwater and metabolizing excess nutrients,” she said. Fitch had applied for the grant on behalf of the Bourne Conservation and Engineering departments.

In addition to the Bourne Conservation and Engineering departments, entities involved with the project include: the Bourne Conservation Commission, the Bourne Natural Resources Department, and the Bourne Conservation Trust, a local nonprofit land trust.

The aim of the project is to address the site’s vulnerabilities, such as the rising sea level and impacts from boating and hiking, through a living shoreline.

As “nature-based solutions,” living shorelines employ “natural elements like salt marshes, dunes, native plants and oyster reefs to stabilize the shoreline, buffer waves and flooding and enhance fish and wildlife habitat,” The Nature Conservancy (TNC) stated in the press release announcing the program.

A global conservation non-profit organization, TNC aims to conserve land and water through collaborative efforts with local communities, the private sector, governments, and other stakeholders.

Run by TNC in Massachusetts, the Northeast Regional Ocean Council (NROC) and other coastal zone management agencies in the region, the living shorelines planning series will offer the Town of Bourne “training and technical assistance…to develop a concept-level design of a living shoreline for a location that experiences coastal flooding and erosion,” the press releases stated.

Open to nonprofits, Indigenous tribes and coastal communities from Maine to Connecticut, a total of 30 applied to the program. Eleven were selected, including three towns in Massachusetts—Bourne, Gloucester and Quincy—and eight communities in Maine, New Hampshire, Connecticut and Rhode Island.

“Participants will now work with staff from the Woods Hole Group and Stone Living Lab to develop conceptual living shoreline designs, cost estimates for building and considerations for monitoring and maintenance,” TNC stated in the press release. “As part of the program, participants will also learn from policy and engineering experts about regulatory and permitting requirements.”

Living shorelines “leverage the power of nature” as it uses “natural systems to accomplish those things that help protect us,” said Steve Kirk, TNC’s coastal director in Massachusetts, during a telephone call with the Enterprise on Wednesday. He added that living shorelines benefit biodiversity and wildlife and improve water quality.

Although this is the first rendition of the living shorelines planning series, the organization has “been investing in advancing living shorelines for many years,” said Kirk. The series is the “next step in the evolution of that work,” he stated, adding that TNC is focused on “supporting communities directly to try to increase their ability to site and implement living shoreline projects.”

“The goal of a living shoreline in this area would be to address these vulnerabilities by stabilizing the shoreline, increasing flood control, restoring habitat and enabling salt marsh migration,” Fitch wrote in the application. She added that this would result in a “healthy salt marsh,” which in turn would “improve water quality by filtering runoff and metabolizing excess nutrients.” It will also “protect the road and hiking path,” Fitch said in an email to the Enterprise on Wednesday, adding that in general the project will make “Monks Park more resilient to storm surge and future stresses on water quality.”

The town’s participation in the living shoreline planning series would also supplement the town’s ongoing stormwater treatment project at that location, aimed at improving the cove’s water quality.

“Monks Park is a town-owned property that drains into a cove of Phinneys Harbor,” Fitch wrote. The salt marsh in question resides at the end of Valley Bars Road and runs along the western side of Monks Park.

Valley Bars Road, paved in 2010 without any stormwater controls, is a town-owned road “which contributes to runoff from about 20,000 square feet of impervious road and parking area,” Fitch noted. She added that “although some disturbance to the salt marsh was already evident due to the presence of an outhaul and parking for boating, aerial imagery shows that the disturbance intensified after 2010 due to stormwater runoff.”

To address the stormwater runoff on that road, the town developed a final stormwater treatment design plan for the road after engaging in an agreement and establishing a Cape Cod water resources project with the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) and the Cape Cod Conservation District in 2021.

In 2023, NRCS granted the town additional grant funding for the design and implementation of the stormwater treatment project, for which the construction is scheduled to begin this fall.

“The ultimate goal of the stormwater project is to improve water quality in the cove, which is a shellfish aquaculture site and a state-approved shellfishing area,” Fitch wrote. “The Town is interested in enhancing this existing work by adding a living shoreline component to continue the project goals of improving water quality and enhancing coastal resilience, as well as addressing coastal erosion and flooding issues.”

The town’s involvement in the living shorelines planning series directing reflects its goal of identifying and restoring salt marshes most in need, as stipulated in its 2019 local comprehensive plan.

Fitch stated that this project would be the “first of several salt marsh restoration projects along Bourne’s 55-mile coastline.” She also noted that through the series’ training, a number of town employees will have the skill set to “identify, plan, design and permit living shoreline projects that meet the community’s climate resilience goals.”

Reflecting how the Town of Bourne expressed interest in enhancing coastal resilience in its application, Kirk stated that the town “is being proactive” in learning and educating its staff and helping the town in the matter. “If we can help marry up some education and technical expertise opportunities for them, while getting good project work lined up–that’s a win for everybody,” Kirk added.

“Closing the area to boat launching, installing stormwater treatment and implementing a living shorelines design will demonstrate the Town’s commitment to water quality and coastal resilience,” Fitch said.

“We as the Town of Bourne need to do everything we can to restore and protect the salt marshes in our town,” Fitch stated on Wednesday.
