Title: Bourne Announces Pilot Program For Substance Use Treatment, Behavorial Health Services
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-02-20T00:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-announces-pilot-program-for-substance-use-treatment-behavorial-health-services/article_3a52eb8e-3aad-40da-ae89-d9a8b21fe22c.html

The Town of Bourne has entered into a one-year contract for a pilot program with Care Solace that will be offered to residents seeking behavioral health services and substance use disorder treatment, starting on Wednesday, April 1.

Acting as a referral service, Care Solace will connect callers to local, vetted, in-network providers and reduce the barriers people face when seeking assistance, said Stephen Berdos, implementation coordinator at the Bourne Health Department.

Care Solace will “take out a lot of cumbersome barriers out of the process for people, and I think it’ll just make the process of finding treatment much quicker,” he said. While it is a multilingual 24/7 hotline, it is not a crisis hotline and will not replace 911.

The contract with Care Solace will be paid for with the opioid abatement funds.

The Town of Bourne, along with many other municipalities, has been receiving opioid abatement funds since 2023 and will continue to do so until 2038 as part of a settlement from a class-action lawsuit against multiple pharmaceutical firms, including Janssen, Teva, Allergan, Walmart, CVS, Walgreens and distributors. With the funds being legally restricted to be used for harm reduction, treatment, recovery and prevention, the town is set to receive approximately $1,426,486 by 2038.

With the goal of spending the money appropriately and efficiently, the town hired Advocates for Human Potential (AHP), a behavioral health consulting firm, to assist with conducting a needs assessment to identify service gaps in the town’s response to the opioid crisis.

The assessment was composed of 281 full- and part-time residents who participated in the 24 interviews and two focus groups the Bourne Opioid Settlement Advising Group conducted, with 58% “reporting lived experience” with the opioid crisis.

A comprehensive plan was developed to guide how the town should spend the abatement funds. One of the five objectives was to remove the barrier to treatment and make “it easier for people to connect to behavioral health services and substance use disorder treatment services,” Berdos said.

Some people go without treatment due to the challenge of finding a provider that accepts new patients “that’s local within their insurance network and someone they feel comfortable meeting with,” as it is a process that usually involves many telephone calls, Berdos said, seeing Care Solace as an effective solution since it will require “one phone call.”

Berdos suggested that callers have their insurance card available in case it will be needed as they answer questions about demographics, including where they live and the type of services they need. Callers might also be asked about the type of insurance they have.

Berdos and others at the Bourne Heath Department have also been working with stakeholders to address other objectives, including a program to improve transportation to and from treatment, introducing a kindergarten to grade 8 education curriculum in the school system for which the school system has been working on finding a vendor to provide, working closer with the Visiting Nurse Association to address substance use disorder in the elderly community and potentially partnering with the AIDS Support Group of Cape Cod to implement a syringe service program.

Having attended the Bourne Substance Free Coalition’s monthly meetings, Berdos said, he has been able to meet with “first responders, people that are retired, people that are connected to the school system—people that have been affected by the opioid crisis in different ways.”

The continuation of the pilot program to offer the services of Care Solace to Bourne residents will depend on its usage, Berdos said. Identities of program participants will be kept anonymous as town employees responsible for facilitating the program will observe how many people are participating in the program, when they joined, their lived experience with substances and demographics, such as age.

Care Solace was founded in 2015 by Chad Castruita, who also serves as the company’s CEO, after he recovered from substance use issues himself.

“He reflected on how the right help was essential to turning his life around,” the Care Solace website states. “He was determined to make accessing care easier and less painful for people experiencing similar struggles.”

Residents can share feedback on their experience with Berdos at sberdos@bourne-ma.gov .
