Title: Bourne FY27 Budget Balanced After Deficit Discussions
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-03-19T18:45:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-fy27-budget-balanced-after-deficit-discussions/article_f1fb287c-335d-4e7e-be21-20c29e01942f.html

The Bourne School District cut its operating budget by $478,532, matching the town’s FY27 budget deficit following discussion during last week’s joint meeting with the Select Board and School Committee.

Kendallynn Gagne, the chairwoman of the School Committee’s Facilities and Budget Subcommittee, announced to the School Committee on Monday , March 16, that after a subcommittee meeting on March 13, the school’s budget was able to decrease.

Decreasing by $478,532, the FY27 Bourne School Department budget will be set at $28,265,696. This adjustment will also be reflected in the town’s general fund operating budget, which will decrease to $84,702,077, and grand total expense, which will decrease to $92,412,947.

The ability to cut the school’s budget was due to a couple of reasons. The subcommittee had completed the school’s budget a month earlier than usual to accommodate moving the highest grade level from Bournedale Elementary, Bourne Intermediate and Bourne Middle School up to the next higher-level school building.

Gagne said this resulted in various “placeholder” numbers being used. With new information, the subcommittee was able to refine the numbers, which helped reduce the budget.

“If that was to be able to save positions in the town, we were all willing to do that,” Gagne said of reducing funds for proposed preventative maintenance for buses and supplies, such as books. “We really wanted to make the least amount of impact to our students.”

Additional reductions were made to the staff expenditure after two staff members had recently announced their retirement, removing an open position and revising the recess monitor schedule.

Bourne Public Schools Director of Business Services Jordan Geist spoke of moving the source of funding for some salaries from the school’s operating budget to the circuit breaker and school choice accounts to assist with resolving the deficit

The school choice account houses the money the school receives for students who school-choice into Bourne Public Schools (BPS). The circuit breaker account, also known as the Commonwealth Special Education Reimbursement Program, “provides financial assistance to public school districts to offset the cost of delivering high-cost special education services to students,” the state’s Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE) states.

In a letter to the Select Board, School Committee chairwoman Donel Beals stated BPS is “relying more heavily on certain offset funding sources that we are not confident will be replenished at the time, at the same level in future years.”

She added that with unknowns regarding potential additional out-of-district special education placements and costs as well, the committee felt “concerned about reducing the operating budget without ensuring that there are mechanisms available to address unanticipated special education costs, should they arise during the fiscal year.”

The School Committee had a consensus vote in approval of the submission of a warrant article draft on March 13 to the Select Board for May Town Meeting. The article requested that the town transfer funds from free cash to the Special Education Reserve Fund, which could be used to address the unanticipated special education costs.

Discussion about how much to request began among the committee. Geist said that his understanding was that “for these types of requests, we’ve never given an amount. It’s always been the town that said this is what we can afford to do this year.”

On Monday, March 16, Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem informed the Finance Committee of the matter. Since the Special Education Reserve Fund is funded by free cash, Finance Director Erica Flemming would conduct a free cash analysis to “see what’s available, if anything,” she said. That amount would be provided to the Select Board as an article, as it is creating the motions.

“The Select Board will have to determine…how these priorities are ranked; if that means less money goes into stabilization or less money goes into capital stabilization or additional capital projects get deferred,” McCollem said, adding that “there’s a lot of pressure on all parts of the budget, but there’s a lot of pressure on free cash.”

Finance Committee clerk Carla Emmons asked about the current amount in the Special Education Reserve Fund, to which Flemming replied that there is “approximately $100,000 in the fund now.”

“I don’t believe it was funded last year,” McCollem said, noting, “you’ll see it when it comes up for replenishment for funding.” The Finance Committee has control over the general reserve fund, she added, and the School Committee and Select Board have control over the Special Education Reserve Fund.

In regard to the school budget, BPS Superintendent Kerri Anne Quinlan-Zhou stated to the School Committee that “Bourne is not an outlier. We’re very much in line with our surrounding towns. It’s simply what education costs now.” Gagne added that information can be found on BPS’s profile on the DESE website.

The School Committee unanimously voted to approve reducing the school’s FY27 operating budget by $478,532, resolving the deficit.

“If this is agreeable to the Select Board, then the budget deficit would be resolved,” McCollem told the Select Board at its meeting on Tuesday , March 17 . The FY27 budget would be updated to reflect the adjustment, and new documents would be distributed to the board.

“I’m willing, at this point, to go with the budget,” Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo said. “I really want to express my appreciation to the School Committee for really sharpening their pencils and making up that difference.” The rest of the Select Board agreed.

She also noted the cuts made to the budget on the municipal side, citing the defunding of the vacant assistant town administrator position for FY27. “I really do want to look at that position in the fall,” Mastrangelo said.

Select Board member Peter J. Meier and Mastrangelo said they understood and supported the decision to defund the vacant position for the upcoming fiscal year. Mastrangelo proposed to the board to reexamine the town’s financial position in the fall to see “where we are” in terms of revenue to refund the role because “that is an important position.”

“I think fall is a great time and an opportunity because we have a little more solid financial picture,” Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian said.

A budget hearing will be held during a Finance Committee and Select Board joint meeting scheduled for Monday, March 30. Both Superintendent Quinlan-Zhou and Upper Cape Tech Superintendent Roger Forget will be present.

“That’ll be essentially kind of our last chance to really button up any loose ends,” McCollem said on Monday to the Finance Committee. “Hopefully, we can have the budget ready to go into the book by the printing deadline.”
