Title: Bourne FinCom Hears Town Meeting Articles
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-03-11T13:36:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-fincom-hears-town-meeting-articles/article_19ddfd5e-8b36-4747-b038-42f22bb602af.html

Articles ranging from betterments to annual requests for town services and equipment proposed for Annual Town Meeting were presented to the Finance Committee on Monday , March 9 .

A proposal to relocate the Algonquin Gas Transmission pipelines was presented by Enbridge, the owner of the pipelines, as it has been seeking approval to utilize town-owned and Conservation Commission-managed land for the project. The Massachusetts Department of Transportation has asked the company to move the three pipeline systems due to upcoming construction for the bridge replacement project.

A pipeline that runs parallel to Route 25 to the area of Bourne Scenic Park (sections G-8C and G-8L) and in the area of Scenic Highway and the Sagamore Bridge (sections G-11 and G-24) will need to be relocated.

Sections G-11 and G-24 are proposed to be relocated north of the existing site. The pipeline replacement is proposed to run parallel to Canal View Road to Pave Paws Road, where a meter station is planned, then across the canal into Bournedale.

The replacement pipeline would follow an existing Eversource high-voltage power corridor on both sides of the canal and affect three land parcels that are subject to an Article 97 land restriction.

Totaling to 2.76 acres, the three parcels are within the Sacrifice Rock Woods Conservation Area, within the Nightingale Pond Conservation Area and between land that is owned by the Buzzards Bay Water Authority and the Division of Fish and Game, south of Bournedale Road.

Due to Article 97, Enbridge is required to provide replacement land for the aforementioned parcels.

As stated on the state’s website, Article 97 “declares the conservation of natural resources a public purpose and provides that land or easements subject to Art. 97 shall not be used for other purposes or disposed of without a two-thirds roll call vote of the Legislature.”

Enbridge senior adviser and land and right-of-way adviser Nancy Kist said the replacement land is “superior” since the replacement land Enbridge is offering is “fully wooded,” whereas the land Enbridge is seeking to acquire is “devoid of trees, shrubs, any plantings.”

Finance Committee member Arthur Wayne Sampson inquired about the replacement land’s conservation status, to which Kist said that Enbridge would “deed it over with a conservation restriction.”

“Is the property that you want to take, conservation land now?” Finance Committee clerk Carla Emmons asked. Kist responded that the three parcels all have Article 97 conservation restrictions.

Emmons asked if the land is considered wetlands, and if that is why there is a conservation restriction on it. Brendan Boyce, in-house counsel for Enbridge, said the “lands are all, for whatever reason, placed under an Article 97 restriction when the town took title to them. So that does not require wetlands. It’s just a conservation use or recreation use. So there’s no wetlands impact for the properties we’re impacting.”

Finance Committee vice chairwoman Amanda Bongiovanni asked if the town has any concerns about the matter. Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem said the Conservation Commission and Select Board are in support of the articles.

The Conservation Commission voted to support the project during a meeting held on February 5 and the Select Board voted to support the project, subject to town counsel review, on February 10.

The project would be presented at Town Meeting as two articles. Sponsored by the Select Board, one article would be to convey the land requested by Enbridge to the company. The other article would request general authorization to file special legislation with the State House to transfer Article 97-protected property.

Having already received a unanimous favorable vote from the Conservation Commission, the article will now require a two-thirds vote at Town Meeting to file the special legislation and then a two-thirds vote in each chamber of the Legislature to pass.

Town Engineer Timothy Lydon presented an article for public acceptance of Daniel Webster Lane and the remaining unaccepted part of Spinnaker Lane, totaling “slightly less than a mile.” He said the abutters, having submitted a petition featuring more than 75% of abutting residents’ signatures in June 2025, have been working with the Select Board and Planning Board on the article; both boards recommended the article.

Lydon said during the discussion with the abutters, it was stated that, due to the disrepair of the streets, a betterment will have to be done. “With the proposed taking of the two roads…we will be looking to assess a betterment of $602,000 and some change,” he said. “That is a not-to-exceed number and will be an estimate based on our paving.”

Lydon added that the county bids “did come out” and that “we will be working closely with them over the next couple months.”

Bongiovanni asked for clarification about the scope of the article, to which Lydon said that “we were looking to accept the roads and we’re going to do a betterment in order to do that.” The betterment will include “a mill and overlay, slight adjustments to some of the structures and do the hand work with a lot of the aprons for the driveways.”

The roads, which were built approximately 35 years ago, have been maintained by a crack seal program. Lydon said that since “they did such a good job with the crack seal, we’re just going to resurface.” The drainage is also in good order, he said.

Emmons asked what would happen if the roads did not pass public acceptance. Lydon replied that “they just retain ownership and custody of the layout.” Emmons continued, asking, “What’s the betterment for the town, except for paying $602,000 to fix their roads?”

“They would be paying for that betterment. We would then accept that road as an asset,” Lydon said. “It’s just like every other road asset that we’ve acquired over time.” The town also receives state funds through the Chapter 90 program, which the state’s website states “provides funding to municipalities for the implementation of capital improvements on local public ways.”

Sampson asked about who maintains or plows the roads. Lydon said the town does currently plow the roads; however, it does not maintain the roads; rather, the residents do so through the crack seal program and annual drainage catch basin cleanings. A homeowner’s association also owns the open space.

The betterment would result in the roads meeting the town’s subdivision regulations.

Lydon also presented an article for the private road betterments for Tara Terrace, Eldridge Street and Eldridge Street Extension , which are part of the Sunset Acres subdivision. As per the temporary repairs bylaw, more than 50% of the abutters of all the streets signed a petition.

“The road does have portions that do need complete reconstruction. There’s also other trenches throughout other portions of the road that are going to need complete reconstruction,” Lydon said. “Beyond that, we’re going to do a mill and overlay and in some places we can get away with a micromill.”

He added that the scope of work for the project has been narrowed and “comes in at $1,038,000 and change,” which is a do-not-exceed number. A 30% contingency on the project is also featured. The project has been awarded a county contract.

Sampson asked if the roads meet quality standards, to which Lydon said they do not. Sampson then asked if the betterments would result in the roads meeting the aforementioned standard. “No, not necessarily,” Lydon said. “We want that to be up to the subdivision standards of the town. We will be very close to meeting that standard, but we don’t have all of the information.”

Lydon said the town does a “quick assessment” of the conditions and creates a “scope based on what we see and what could be the best plan forward that the abutters agree with going forward.”

“So we’re helping them with the betterment, but we’re not making it a public way,” Sampson said.

Finance Committee chairman James D. Sullivan asked what the difference would be for the owners to seek a betterment compared to hiring a company themselves to fix the roads. “The short of it, the town kind of becomes the bank. It’s very hard to pass the hat around for abutters to do this,” Lydon said, noting the repairs are expensive. “We’re going to get this done professionally to be a road that’s going to be worthy for many years.”

“So basically, the town will fund the project for the residents, and the residents will pay back the town the entire amount over a 20-year period?” Sampson asked. Town Finance Director Erica Flemming replied that payments can be spread out up to 20 years.

Abutters can either “pay it off up front or they can elect to pay it in a shorter time period and they will have to pay 5% interest. Or if the market rate is higher, we’ll adjust for that depending on what the market is when we go out to borrow,” she said.

Emmons asked if the betterment would be paid through the abutters’ property tax as an additional line item, which Flemming confirmed. Sampson inquired if the abutters were to pay in advance, then 100% of the money would go toward the betterment, which Flemming also confirmed.

Sampson also asked how many other streets are also in a betterment program and if it is something unusual. Lydon said there are “eight or nine,” and that he has “done 10 [betterments] in my 10 years.”

Having viewed the Select Board’s discussion on the matter, Bongiovanni asked if there have been any updates since it was learned that two open-space parcels that have frontage on Tara Terrace have not paid taxes.

Sampson asked if one house was “currently in arrears” whether a lien would be placed on the house for that amount. Fleming said, “It would be part of the same mechanism we use for unpaid taxes,” meaning a lien would be put on “the property through the tax title process.”

As co-chairwoman of the Human Services Committee, Debora Oliviere-Llanes requested that the town approve $40,000 for Fiscal Year 2027.

The committee had received “requests from 10 human service agencies in the amount of $45,600,” Oliviere-Llanes said. “We’re just looking to stay level-funded this year.”

The Finance Committee had no questions or comments on the matter.

Flemming, the town’s finance director, said that in May 2024, the town had a “borrowing authorization in the amount of $2.1 million for the wastewater treatment plant at the school facility.”

Since “a different article to do a repair instead of a full replacement” has since come forward, Flemming requested rescinding the original authorization. “We never borrowed the money. It doesn’t result in any additional money. We just won’t be authorized to borrow the money,” she said.

Sullivan asked if that would require a two-thirds vote at Town Meeting. McCollem replied, “I think we need the two-thirds to use the money, but only a majority to give it back.”

Flemming presented a request to “increase the demand fee charged for bills subject to such fees,” such as “property taxes, motor vehicle excise, sewer charges, boat excise, mooring and marinas” to $30, which is the maximum amount that it can be increased.

Currently set at $15, a demand fee is “essentially…a late fee for nonpayment,” Flemming said, noting that the increase could “generate double the income or maybe it’ll be an incentive for people to pay on time.” It was previously increased from $5 to $15 after May Special Town Meeting in 2013.

Having identified in last year’s audit report that the town “holds funds that remain unclaimed for extended periods,” mostly uncashed checks, Flemming proposed adopting the general law statute that relates “to the disposition of abandoned funds held by the town.”

This would establish a “mechanism to collect money and eventually turn it back into the town’s coffers,” she said.

“What happens to money now, if you write a check for $100,000 and don’t get cash for four years?” Sullivan asked. “Is that money still in our checking account, just sitting there?”

“It’s there as a liability, if you will,” Flemming said. She stated that there are two options: “If we don’t accept this law...the state could escheat the funds,” citing findmassmoney.gov . If the statute is adopted at Town Meeting, then the town “can actually advertise and eventually, if the money is not claimed, the money stays with the town instead of going to the state.”

Emmons asked how much unclaimed funds the town is holding. “I would say maybe a hundred thousand…It wouldn’t fill the budget deficit or anything like that, but we need to clean it up,” Flemming said.

Town Administrator Marlene McCollem requested $50,000 in noncapital purchases for the next fiscal year for items that are one-time costs but do not reach the $25,000 threshold for capital equipment purchases.

This is the second time this request has been made. At last year’s Town Meeting, it was approved, allowing the town to fully purchase a sidewalk snowplow for $17,576.80 and a lawn mower for $12,722.24 to assist with mowing, especially the baseball fields.

The remaining balance of $19,700.96 would be earmarked for concrete repairs to the bleachers at Keith Field for $10,000, for a project to improve audio and visual equipment in the meeting room at the Veterans Memorial Community Center for $8,000 and a new vacuum cleaner for Town Hall, as the previous one broke.

Emmons asked, “Otherwise, wouldn’t you have had to come to us each time to get this approved?” McCollem said, “We don’t really have a good mechanism…so really we would have to go to Town Meeting for a separate article for each of these things, which makes it hard for the department to do the work, to get the smaller things.”

“We’re all thinking ahead for capital for the big things, but sometimes we don’t necessarily remember an article for a lawn mower or a vacuum cleaner,” she added.

Sullivan inquired if the $50,000 that is appropriated for a given year has to return to the general fund at the end of its respective year. “Articles roll over from fiscal year to fiscal year,” and that money left in the article is “still available next fiscal year,” McCollem replied. “If we had put money in the department’s budget for [this] equipment and it wasn’t spent, they would be certified as future free cash. They would not necessarily roll. They would have to be re-budgeted.”

Citing the Recreation Committee’s potential redesign of Keith Field, Bongiovanni sought clarification as to why the town would be investing in repairing the bleachers. McCollem said the “concrete is getting to the point of being dangerous” and that the repair is serving as an “interim Band-Aid solution” until the “big project” wholly addresses Keith Field.

The committee will vote on the matter in a couple of weeks.
