Title: Bourne Sewer Commissioners Vote To Reappoint Officers
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-29T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-sewer-commissioners-vote-to-reappoint-officers/article_cde97fcc-e4d1-462d-82f9-6f619d41e272.html

The Bourne Board of Sewer Commissioners voted to maintain its officer positions at its meeting on Tuesday , May 26 , with Anne-Marie Siroonian, Jeanne L. Azarovitz and Mary Jane Mastrangelo set to continue to serve as chairwoman, vice chairwoman and clerk, respectively, for another year.

The Sewer Commissioners have the opportunity to reconfigure the board after Annual Town Meeting and an election.

A motion was made by Azarovitz to nominate Siroonian for chairwoman, which board member Melissa A. Ferretti seconded.

“I would love to support you for a second year,” Ferretti said. Noting that “one year goes by fast,” she described how she would want Siroonian to have more time to lead the board.

Siroonian said she would accept the nomination for a variety of reasons. In addition to wanting to review sewer policy and regulations and support other aspects of the town’s sewer system, she described how she would like to oversee the completion of the wastewater treatment facility in “making it sustainable and effective, and not have to constantly shut it down and ensure that the money spent by the people of this community” for the treatment facility “is well spent.”

Siroonian said another reason she would accept the nomination is to continue “protecting users” as well as maintaining the board’s understanding of the expense that sewer users incur.

The commissioners approved the motion unanimously, reappointing Siroonian as chairwoman of the board.

After Mastrangelo made a motion to nominate Azarovitz as vice chairwoman of the board, which board member Peter J. Meier seconded, Azarovitz accepted the nomination.

The board voted unanimously to approve the motion.

Lastly, the board discussed the position of clerk, which began with Ferretti making a motion to nominate Meier for the role.

However, Meier said, “I politely decline it.” Azarovitz then made a motion to nominate Mastrangelo as clerk, which was seconded by Meier. With Mastrangelo accepting the nomination, the board voted unanimously to approve the motion.

After the votes were taken, the results were effective immediately.
