Title: Bourne Town Counsel Clarifies Appointment Process For Town Moderator
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-06-10T13:45:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-town-counsel-clarifies-appointment-process-for-town-moderator/article_31150244-3655-409d-ae5e-46a29448c7c0.html

With a vacancy in the position of town moderator, Town Counsel Bryan F. Bertram and Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem provided clarification as to what the next steps are in filling that role at the Bourne Select Board’s meeting on Tuesday , June 9 .

Town Moderator is an elected position in Bourne. The Town Moderator is responsible for moderating Town Meetings as well as appointing the Finance Committee.

Prior to this town election cycle, former town moderator Amy B. Kullar had announced that she would not be running for reelection. With no official candidates on the ballot, Bourne residents wrote in names. Despite stating that she would not run again, Kullar still received the majority of write-ins; she declined the position.

“It’s really not workable to go forward until the next Town Meeting without a moderator,” Bertram said. “In these types of circumstances, you can always hold a special election, but that seems a little bit futile, given that we just held an election; we didn’t have anyone elected.”

State statute Chapter 41, Section 11 outlines what can be done in situations like these, which Bertram cited on Tuesday. “Anytime we have a vacancy in a town office, whether by failure to elect or otherwise, other than certain specified town offices, of which moderator is not one, the Select Board can appoint a person to fill that vacancy until the next election,” Bertram stated.

Bertram reiterated that this is the process for fulfilling the term until its completion, which he clarified is a different process from electing a substitute town moderator at Town Meeting in a situation where the actual moderator is unavailable to attend the event.

After Bertram clarified the difference between the two processes, Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti asked McCollem what next steps should be taken to appoint a town moderator. McCollem replied that the town would ask for letters of intent from interested applicants. Following a period of approximately 30 days, the Select Board would then invite applicants to the next meeting thereafter.

The Select Board unanimously voted to open a 30-day period for letters of intent to be submitted for the position of town moderator.

Following the vote, Select Board clerk Mary Jane Mastrangelo inquired about the logistics of the two Finance Committee members whose terms are expiring on June 30, which falls before a new town moderator is selected following the 30-day period.

“If we don’t have a moderator, are they automatically extended until someone can be appointed?” Mastrangelo asked. “Yes, they’re holdovers until you have somebody else and you can fill the position,” Bertram answered.

The new town moderator could either reappoint members or appoint new members at that time.
