Title: Bourne Historical Commission Approves Demolition Of Buzzards Bay Home
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-01T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-historical-commission-approves-demolition-of-buzzards-bay-home/article_7ea26c2c-a18a-4852-adfe-cfe48dfb9cd1.html

The Bourne Historical Commission has approved the proposed demolition of a home on Lewis Point Road in Buzzards Bay. Town records show the home was built in 1949.

Joseph Povoas, the new owner of the property at 73 Lewis Point Road, appeared before the commission at its meeting on Tuesday , April 28, to request approval to demolish the house.

“We have no intention of building on it,” Povoas said of his plans for the land.

Povoas and his wife have lived in the abutting property at 77 Lewis Point Road for more than 15 years and purchased 73 Lewis Point Road in January. William L. Gosselin, the previous owner, died in November 2024 and left the property to his nephew, who put it up for sale.

The home is 77 years old, so the commission’s approval was necessary under town bylaw because the home is more than 75 years old.

Section 3.14.1 of the town bylaw is in effect to “preserve and protect historically significant buildings within the Town of Bourne that reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, economic, political or social history of the Town.”

The bylaw further defines a significant building as “any building or portion thereof which in whole or in part is more than seventy-five (75) years old or is listed in the historical survey of the Town of Bourne and on file with the Bourne Historical Commission.”

Povoas described the presence of black mold and odor throughout the house and overgrown vegetation throughout the yard as he showed the commission photos depicting the condition of the house and property.

“It is full of mold. We don’t want anyone building there. We just want to take it down,” he said.

Commission member Judith A. Riordan asked for Povoas to elaborate further on his intentions for the property. Povoas reiterated the goal of demolishing the building and expanded on future plans for the property.

He said he would continue exploring how to “blend it into ours,” referring to how his and his wife’s property abuts the property in question. The two properties are separate entities at the moment—the goal is to eventually combine the two into one property.

In addition to demolishing the house on 73 Lewis Point Road, Povoas shared plans for the property, including cutting down trees, noting a tree from the property had nearly fallen on his house a couple of years ago. He also plans to make the properties “contiguous” by regrading parts of the properties, filling in the basement and removing the house’s connection to the town’s water line.

Noting that he was told by a town official that there is no record of a septic system, work will also have to be done to resolve that matter. “I have to pay, even though they can’t find a record of a septic system,” Povoas said, adding that “there’s a pipe coming out of the house and the pipe goes someplace.”

Commission vice chairman Steven Philbrick said the property might be using a cesspool instead. “There may not be a record of it,” he added.

Riordan said that other than the age of the building, it does not appear to be historically significant. “It is not, as far as our knowledge, historically significant or architecturally significant,” she added.

A motion to accept the demolition of the property was approved unanimously by the commission members.

Povoas said he will also present the matter to the Conservation Commission in early May. Due to the property’s location within 100 feet of a coastal embankment, the Conservation Commission must grant its approval for any work.

The final step will be for the building inspector to grant final approval.
