Title: Bourne Town Counsel Confirms Minimal Impact Of Pathway Construction At Keith Field
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-29T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-town-counsel-confirms-minimal-impact-of-pathway-construction-at-keith-field/article_1b3f4663-7a64-46ce-b766-2217f686e3c5.html

The Bourne Select Board received an update from town counsel regarding the Massachusetts Department of Transportation’s (MassDOT) request for concurrence in regard to a proposed improvement around Keith Field in South Sagamore.

The last meeting between the Bourne Select Board and representatives from the MassDOT’s Cape Cod Bridges Replacement program on May 19 resulted in the MassDOT requesting that the board sign a letter concurring that the MassDOT’s proposed construction of a bike/pedestrian path at Keith Field in South Sagamore would have a de minimis, or minimal, impact on the area.

At the end of that meeting, the board unanimously agreed to sign the letter, contingent on town counsel’s review of the letter’s determination that the proposed path would have minimal impact on the area and assurance that the letter pertains solely to “the creation of a temporary and permanent shared use path (the “SUP”) and not for other activities related” to the Cape Cod Bridges Project.

“I have reviewed the Letter and am satisfied that the Town’s requested concurrence applies only to the limited use of the Keith Field Recreation Area for the SUP and not for other aspects of the [Cape Cod Bridges Project],” Town Counsel Bryan F. Bertram wrote to the Select Board in a letter dated Tuesday , May 26 .

Specifically, in regard to MassDOT’s request that the town sign off on a letter acknowledging that, in accordance with Section 4(f) of the US Department of Transportation Act, the new pathway will have a minimal impact on the Keith Field area, Bertram wrote that MassDOT requires concurrence from the “local authority” on that determination.

Asking for the Select Board’s concurrence thereby satisfies that legal requirement.

Section 4(f) protects significant publicly owned parks, recreation areas, wildlife/waterfowl refuges, and historic sites. Under Section 4(f), the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) cannot approve transportation projects using these lands unless there are no “feasible and prudent” avoidance alternatives, and all possible planning to minimize harm has occurred.

Bertram confirmed that the letter proposed by MassDOT seeks the Select Board’s “concurrence only as to a de minimis finding for the SUP, and not for other activities related to the [Cape Cod Bridges Project].”

Having received Bertram’s letter “confirming our understanding,” Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem shared with the Select Board at its meeting on Tuesday that on Wednesday , May 27, she would “sign the concurrence letter and return it to MassDOT.”

As part of the Sagamore Bridge replacement project, MassDOT had proposed improvements at Keith Field and along Sandwich Road.

The proposed path would go along Sandwich Road at Keith Field, beside the left field fence of the ballpark, across the train tracks, and connect with the Canal Service Road. This new pathway and additional improvements to Sandwich Road would result in the loss of unauthorized parking along the third baseline.

To compensate for the loss of the unauthorized parking, MassDOT had proposed construction of a new parking lot on the opposite side of Sandwich Road to accommodate people going to the ball field, and a new crosswalk with a flashing yellow light was part of the proposal. However, members of the Select Board and the Recreation Committee said they did not believe it to be safe for people crossing the road.

MassDOT subsequently abandoned the parking lot idea, but had offered to continue pursuing construction of the pedestrian/bicycle path.
