Title: Bourne Select Board Authorizes Bourne Cannabis As HCA Recipient
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-01-15T17:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-select-board-authorizes-bourne-cannabis-as-hca-recipient/article_5c152525-9252-49e3-a589-f0ff6f5153df.html

After months of deliberation, the Select Board at its meeting on Tuesday , January 13, reached a final decision that Bourne Cannabis will be the recipient of the outstanding social equity host community agreement (HCA) for a cannabis dispensary in town.

In recent months the board has discussed two applicants for the agreement: Bourne Cannabis and Cape Cod Dispensary, doing business as NLM, Inc. Board members used a rubric from the Massachusetts Cannabis Control Commission (CCC) to score the applicants.

The board initially selected Bourne Cannabis as the recipient in September. However, NLM took issue with the scoring process, claiming the votes reflected bias, ultimately causing the board to take another look at the process.

The board began the discussion seeking clarification on whether the narrative must be agreed upon before the board authorizes Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem to sign the HCA. The board had decided at its meeting on December 17 to hold another discussion to finalize the vote and narrative.

“It is not strictly necessary,” Town Counsel Bryan F. Bertram said. “The reason we want the narrative is if we end up having to defend this decision, we have agreed upon reasons or at least we have the reasons of the board. I’m perfectly fine if the board wants to entertain a motion and vote to execute the HCA.”

Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie G. Siroonian and chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti both said they did not have any additional changes to the narrative or support it, as they still believe NLM is the better candidate.

Siroonian cited her belief that NLM had a strong plan for diversion and prevention, local involvement and outreach, diversity, consumer education, cooperative community outreach, compliance plans and hiring plans. Ferretti agreed with most of those reasons, adding that she believed NLM’s location was attractive.

“But with that said, we still have to decide. We have to come to a consensus this evening,” Ferretti concluded.

Tuesday night’s vote reflected the one taken in September, with board members Peter J. Meier, Mary Jane Mastrangelo and Jeanne L. Azarovitz voting in favor of Bourne Cannabis, and Ferretti and Siroonian both voting for NLM.

However, Cape Cod Dispensary’s owners and legal representatives, Foley & Hoag, said the scores were an example of bias due to Meier being a friend of former Planning Board member Steven P. Strojny, whose spouse and two children are all co-owners of Bourne Cannabis.

The Cape Cod Dispensary team has said that Meier had awarded three of the candidates for the HCA, including Cape Cod Dispensary, with very low scores, but he had given Bourne Cannabis 99 out of 100 points. The average score given to Cape Cod Dispensary by other board members averaged 96.25; Meier gave it a 47. Board members had asked that he recuse himself from the process.

Meier has argued that he based his decision upon “the town’s best interests” as, in his view, Bourne Cannabis was the best applicant.

As a result, Azarovitz had some concerns about how the process played out and announced during a November 18 meeting that she had changed her mind regarding choosing Bourne Cannabis, and during the workshop on December 17, Azarovitz said she had some concerns regarding the narrative that the board has drafted on the decision.

“I was looking for more support for the scores to support the differences in the scores,” Azarovitz said on Tuesday in regard to wanting more time to deliberate the authorization.

“I have had a long time to think about this and we have had a lot more discussion since the last time and although I still have reservations, I feel it’s in the best interest of the town and everyone involved right now to move along,” Azarovitz said before voting yes.

Next up for discussion was approving the draft narrative. “Does the narrative represent the vote of the board?” Mastrangelo asked.

“It represents some of the votes,” Ferretti said.

Siroonian said, “Like I said, we can deliberate this all day long, and we will not come to the same agreement.”

After a brief discourse about possible changes in regard to the reference to NLM’s location in the narrative, Mastrangelo made a motion to accept the draft narrative decision as proposed on November 4, which carried 3-2-0, reflecting the vote authorizing McCollem to sign Bourne Cannabis as the HCA recipient.

NLM did not advance for the following reasons as noted in the draft narrative: “Did not present as strong a plan for diversion and prevention. Did not demonstrate as strong a plan for local involvement and did not present a hiring plan that was as diverse. The proposal for consumer education was not as strong. There were concerns about the location. Compliance plans were not well addressed and the hiring plan was vague.”

This draft narrative outlined that Bourne Cannabis, LLC was chosen as the HCA recipient due to the following reasons: “Presented a strong diversion and prevention plan. Presented a strong energy and environment plan. Presented deep local involvement in the operation. Presented a realistic schedule to begin operations in a timely manner.”

“It is finally done,” Ferretti said. “Congratulations.”
