Title: Bourne Department Heads Present Proposed FY27 Operating Budgets
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-01-23T00:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-department-heads-present-proposed-fy27-operating-budgets/article_da55e076-d85c-4140-89dc-6d93ca136074.html

Fiscal Year 2027 budget discussions for the Town of Bourne continued as the operating budgets of departments were presented on January 13. The Sewer Commissioners reviewed their proposed budget on Tuesday , January 20 .

The Police Department’s proposed operating budget will be approximately $6,620,300, which is an increase of 4.76%, or $301,298, compared to FY26.

“The majority of the salary changes…are tied to collective bargaining agreements,” Police Chief Brandon M. Esip said.

Overtime, holiday pay and differential pay also increased.

Increases in services and supplies were due to needed repairs and upgrades in equipment, training and IT, he said.

“Everything IT-related, the costs are going up. Stuff that was new in our building, we’re having to replace… We’re now in that replacement cycle,” Esip said. “In total, that’s about $36,000 in non-salary [collective bargaining agreement] increases.”

The Fire Department’s budget was presented by Fire Chief David S. Pelonzi. The department’s budget will be approximately $6,129,714, an increase of 5.5%, or $319,997, from the previous year’s budget.

He said that the reason for the increase is partially due to contractual obligations that will increase salaries. Overtime is also going up, Pelonzi said.

Specifically, the EMS administration, which is the overtime that is allocated for operating the ambulance, will increase to offset the demand, Pelonzi said.

The department’s budget also featured slight decreases to the medical supply equipment, repair and maintenance for the machine contract, infectious disease control and hazardous waste contract budgets.

The budget for dispatch was yet to be finalized as of January 13.

“I still do not have any idea what dispatch is going to cost us this year…I anticipate that number may change,” Pelonzi said. “Nothing yet from the Sheriff’s Office. Once I have that, we’ll be able to plug that in.”

Integrated Solid Waste Management (ISWM) General Manager Daniel T. Barrett presented ISWM’s operating budget, which, including its reserve funds, totals to $18,494,294. It includes salary growth.

“We’re increasing staff as we get busier,” Barrett said as he explained the request for clothing allowance. Other increases are due to repairs, equipment and supplies, light trucks and hazardous waste.

“The cost of handling is rising, but the popularity of household hazardous waste is increasing,” Barrett said. “We see more of it coming into our facility, so it’s costing us a little bit more money, but it’s keeping it out of the drain pipes and out of somebody’s backyard and in the woods.”

ISWM’s budget also shows an increase in electricity. “Our electric needs continue to grow; we have more pumps,” he said. “Not disproportionately, and we can handle it, but I just wanted to keep you aware of that.”

Finance Director Erica Flemming presented the department’s budget of $1,125,742, representing an 8.81% increase, or $91,162, from the previous year’s budget. The town’s accounting, assessing and treasury/collections offices are part of the department.

Increases to the department’s budget are due to contractual salary increases, hiring an assistant town accountant after the administrative assistant resigned and office supplies, she said.

Flemming also presented the proposed debt services budget, totaling $5,393,000, representing a 5.34% increase, or $273,470, from last year’s budget.

She said that the increase is primarily due to “short-term interest costs for projects that we have authorized in prior Town Meetings,” Flemming said. “The new debt that’s coming on relates to the police gun range, Jackson Field bleachers, the school wastewater treatment plant, the fire gear, the police roof and the middle school roof.”

The presentation then transitioned to a discussion of the town’s debt service costs and capital stabilization funding plan.

“I know we were talking about the host community fee and increasing that revenue source in the budget. Well, if we’re increasing that revenue source in the budget, it’s not going to be available here on the other end to source the debt service cost,” Flemming said. “So at some point, we’ve got to decide which route, because one does affect the other.”

She added, “This isn’t new. We have been using reserves to fund the budget for many, many, many years. Right now, we have a plan in place using capital stabilization, but in the past, it was free cash. So it’s not a new problem. It’s just looking at what’s right for us at this time.”

Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo expressed concern about using free cash in the capital stabilization fund to then use it for debt service.

“I think we need to find ways in the revenue and find ways to say ‘capital stabilization is not going to become the way that we fund our debt service,’” she said.

“That’s not the intent here…the intent at the time was that was a plan that worked, and that has been a goal with me and Marlene [McCollem] to wean ourselves off of that,” Flemming responded. “I know that the year before last, we were only looking for $344,000 to fund our capital stabilization. We thought, ‘Hey, this is going to be the year that we’re not going to need it.’ But with the rise in costs and constraints on revenue, we needed it to avoid cuts.”

Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem said that “there are decision points along the way that we have to make. Are you going to segregate or earmark revenues to put against debt services so we don’t have to use this? Those are questions that we need to discuss and decide as a group.”

“At the end of the day, you—as a Select Board—and we—as town administrator and finance director—need to understand we’re not going to be able to do everything. We’re not going to be able to pay for everything. We’re not going to be able to fund everything,” she added.

Referencing the $136 million, five-year capital plan, Mastrangelo said that she’s worried about “where we are and how we’re doing things and being realistic about what the impacts are going to be.”

McCollem presented the proposed budget for shared costs, which totaled approximately $21,133,394, a 4.33%, or $877,390, increase from the FY26 budget. Public utilities, insurance, retirement pensions, unemployment and reserve fund are some of the items comprising shared costs.

Her presentation also included a proposal to terminate the monitoring and verification service costs within a contract for the HVAC systems in the school building and community center building, citing issues with the systems and the steep price of the program.

The town would only be guaranteed energy savings if the buildings operated during certain hours and set temperatures. However, due to the humidity’s effects on the buildings, the system had to be overridden and operated overnight and on weekends.

The board voted to terminate the contract from the budget.

McCollem presented the FY27 budget of the town administrator’s office, which is approximately $540,345, an 18.69% decrease from last year. This significant budget reduction is a results from defunding the vacant assistant town administrator position for FY27.

Mastrangelo said she understood the motivation for defunding the position to avoid having to lay someone off, but was concerned about the office being without that position and asked about future plans associated with the position.

“Right now, based on the revenue forecast that we are working with, this funding is removed for the entirety of FY27,” McCollem responded. “If the revenue forecast changes in the future, then that’s a conversation to have.”

The other Select Board members agreed with Mastrangelo’s statement.

“I think I was concerned as well because of staff level and what needs to be done in the department, but I certainly understand having to cut somewhere and I see where you’re saving a job from someone else,” Select Board chair Melissa A. Ferretti said.

“I would like to continue to have this discussion about that position as we go through the budget process,” Mastrangelo said.

The office also proposed increases to IT for service contracts for software packages and for digitizing the mooring renewal process. The salaries are contractual.

The proposed Department of Public Works budget totaled $3,154,876. It will increase 3.57%, or $108,988, from the previous year’s budget. Of that amount, $94,093 was budgeted to personnel costs, the majority of which was due to contractual increases.

“We did propose a 7% increase to our overtime budget to compensate for the salary increases since the new union contract in FY25,” DPW Director Matt Sawicki said.

The remaining increase to the DPW’s budget for next year is due to services and supplies. While contracted services and vehicle parts were the primary sources, the budget also increased due to safety equipment repairs and data processing.

“We’re having a lot of increases with the parts,” Sawicki said. “The tariffs, we’ve been finding, have been adding to the increased costs.”

Sawicki also presented the Public Works’ budget, which is composed of snow removal, street and traffic lights, facilities management, and vehicle supplies and fuel.

Street and traffic lights and snow removal accounts saw no changes, and totaled $56,000 and $338,000, respectively.

The vehicle supplies account’s budget will total $250,000, which is a 16.66% decrease from last year. “We have a reduction of $50,000,” he said. “Based on historic numbers and gallons, and the cost of gasoline has gone down, we should think that’ll be substantial savings for the town.”

The facilities management budget totaled to $907,917, an increase of 4.86%, or $42,074. He said that the increase is due to contractual salary obligations.

On Tuesday, January 20, Sawicki also presented the draft sewer operating budget, totaling $2,147,989.

Regarding the personnel services, the increases were due to contractual obligations and mirrored what was done with other DPW budgets.

Other requests include $200 for energy and fuels; $550 for water bills; $11,597 for Wareham, which is a 2.5% contractual agreement with the town to send up to 200,000 gallons a day to their wastewater treatment plant; $1,600 for tablets to monitor data; $20,000 for contracted services; and $94,174 for the Wareham expenditure capital.

This year’s total State Revolving Fund payment for the Town of Bourne will be $141,599.

The budget proposes $10,000 in electricity bills, which is based on historic data. Sawicki hopes that this will help offset the increases.

Sawicki also proposed a budget initiative to build the infiltration and inflow inspections that are within the sewer collection system, into the budget at $30,500 a year for the upcoming years.

“As opposed to a single project, DPW is recommending funding the cleaning and inspections of individual subsections of the system on an annual basis,” the initiative description stated.

“Instead of doing the project and immediately doing repairs, we get the information first, then I present the repairs to you separately as a capital project when needed,” Sawicki said.

The board unanimously voted to adopt the $30,550 initiative in the FY27 sewer budget.

The proposed budget will make its way to Town Meeting and can be amended throughout this time, as well as at Town Meeting.

Over the next couple of months, several meetings will be held regarding the budget.

The Select Board will vote on Tuesday, January 27, to send the draft budget to the Finance Committee. The budget will begin its review by the Finance Committee on Monday, February 2. The committee will hold a public meeting on Monday, March 16.

While the deadline for the School Committee to vote on the School Department budget is Wednesday, April 1, the committee is attempting to do so in early March.

On Friday, April 17, the proposed budget will be sent to be printed in the Voter Handbooks.

Town Meeting will be held on Monday, May 4.
