Title: Bourne School Committee, Select Board Discuss FY27 Budget Deficit
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-03-13T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-school-committee-select-board-discuss-fy27-budget-deficit/article_ddeaa87c-75a7-464c-9fc1-a4b723d25414.html

The conversation around the Fiscal Year 2027 budget continued as the Bourne School Committee and Bourne Select Board discussed the impact of the increased cherry sheet assessment, which is the main driver of the deficit.

A joint meeting was held on Tuesday , March 10, to discuss the FY27 budget deficit in advance of the Finance Committee’s public hearing on Monday, March 30, and Annual Town Meeting on Monday, May 4. With Bourne’s FY27 total expenses at $92,891,479 and total revenues at $92,412,946, the result is a deficit of $478,532.

Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem explained the circumstances that led to the deficit. She explained that when building a budget, one of the assumptions made is that the cherry sheets are level-funded. A cherry sheet is the “official notification to cities, towns and regional school districts of the next fiscal year’s state aid and assessments,” the Massachusetts Department of Revenue’s Municipal Finance Glossary states.

In comparison to FY26, the preliminary FY27 cherry sheets on the state’s website currently show that the state aid to Bourne increased by $334,096; however, the town is being assessed $636,910 more, resulting in a cherry sheet deficit of $302,814.

Since, per the town’s charter, the Select Board must “present a balanced budget to Town Meeting, the Select Board will have to decide how to orchestrate cuts to this budget,” McCollem said. She suggested that for the board to do so “wisely and thoughtfully,” a conversation must be had with the School Committee because the Bourne Public School’s (BPS) FY27 budget assessment and the municipal services budget are “where there’s ability to cut,” because there is not room to cut retirement assessments and other “big budget lines.”

The total cost to run the school district, not including offsets, is $41,625,981. The largest part of that total is the FY27 school operating budget of $28,744,228. The remainder is composed of shared costs, debt services and the cherry sheet assessments.

School Committee chairwoman Donel Beals began the discussion, stating that when Superintendent Kerri Anne Quinlan-Zhou and Director of Business Services Jordan Geist presented the budget to Town Hall, it was her recollection that “everyone was fine” with BPS’s budget assessment increasing by 3.7%.

Beals stated the school’s budget undergoes a “rigorous process” through the Facilities and Budget Subcommittee and was ultimately approved by the School Committee. “We definitely want to help the town,” she said. “I don’t know that we have a ton to work with…We want to help, I just don’t know really where we can cut.”

Beals added that BPS’s budget is “in line with our neighbors,” referencing Sandwich, Falmouth and Wareham public schools and Upper Cape Technical Regional School.

School Committee member Maria Heaney, who also serves on the Facilities and Budget Subcommittee, said that creating the school’s operating budget involved balancing growing needs and demands, and school building maintenance and repairs, with being fiscally responsible.

Referencing the UCT enrollment discrepancies that students who do not live in Bourne are being labeled as Bourne students, Heaney said, “I would hate for us to be hasty about cutting our budget or cutting people when we know right now that there should be money coming back into the town.”

In response, Select Board member Peter J. Meier said “a comment was just made accusing Upper Cape Tech of a mistake” and that UCT Superintendent Roger Forget, who was in the audience, should be able to “defend their action,” saying to the School Committee that “you’re not going to throw someone under the bus.”

Beals said that Forget is “welcome to come up and speak; however, [Heaney] did not throw anyone under the bus.”

“I’m saying at this point it appears that money should be coming back to the town. I’m not the one determining whether or not it is, but I know these conversations have taken place,” Heaney said, citing the letter sent by the Select Board to the Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE) last week. “This is a discussion that should be part of the larger discussion of the budget because it’s not separate.”

Beals added that it was her understanding that UCT did not input the numbers; rather, DESE input the numbers. Heaney stated, “If an error has been made, no matter who made it, if it gets corrected, that’s considerable money coming back into the town.”

Prefacing that she is speaking as a taxpayer in Bourne, Tina Canterbury cited her 25 years of experience as an administrative assistant for Bourne Middle School, during which she stated that when she enrolled students, “the first thing you do is check residency. You get proof of address. You find out where they live.” She added, “I don’t know why UCT didn’t do that. I think they should be made to pay.”

Beals asked about the enrollment process. “We do the residential street address. That’s how we determine whether those 02532s live in Wareham or if they live in Bourne,” Canterbury said. “We haven’t had one wrong yet. We make sure that these kids live in the Town of Bourne.” She added that if the students do not, they are marked as school choice and the School Department bills the sending town for their respective students.

Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo returned focus to the cherry sheets. Referencing the deficit in the assessment side of the cherry sheets, Mastrangelo noted that those expenses “come out of the revenues,” which the town does not have.

She also added that the “majority of those assessments are school related…and that is money that has to come out of the general fund,” whereas the money on the revenue side of the cherry sheets “goes directly to the schools.” Mastrangelo stated that one of the primary issues with the deficit is that the increase in the cherry sheet assessment has to be covered somehow.

Heaney inquired more about what role the UCT enrollment discrepancy played in the budget. “That has nothing to do with the cherry sheet assessment,” Mastrangelo said. “The Upper Cape Tech is not related to the cherry sheet deficit; it’s related to the town’s budget deficit.”

In addition to asking DESE for an explanation on the error, Mastrangelo said that the letter also informed DESE of the issue that Buzzards Bay and Wareham share the same ZIP code of 02532.

“It’s a problem for motor vehicle excise. It’s a problem for voter registration and…it’s newly identified as a problem for identifying students,” she said, adding that the assessor’s office and the town clerk manually verify street addresses. “It’s not a UCT problem. It’s really a problem that has to do with the ZIP code.”

“But it’s also a problem. Things should be correctly billed,” Heaney said. “It happened for 1,000 reasons. It happens for other systems, but for this system, for our town and for our school district, we should recognize that going forward, it needs to be corrected.”

Mastrangelo agreed that the problem needs to be addressed, but that is not what originally happened regarding the budget deficit.

Mastrangelo reiterated that the school-related assessments on the cherry sheets are the main part of the $478,532 budget deficit. “There is no more revenue,” she said, before noting that the town had to defund the assistant town administrator position for FY27.

Mastrangelo emphasized working together to solve the budget deficit. Beals and Heaney both agreed. However, Heaney said she wanted to address “a couple of large elephants in the room that had been in the previous meeting that have come into this room with us that need to be addressed.”

She added that if the Town of Bourne receives money from the UCT enrollment discrepancies, she “would hope that there’s consideration that when the money does come back, it does get considered to go back into the school budget to make up” for potential cuts to the school budget.

Select Board chairwoman Annie-Marie Siroonian stated that the “issue with UCT is being dealt with” as the board is “very diligent with correcting that” and “establishing a process that it doesn’t happen again.”

“It would be fiscally irresponsible of this board to rely on an outcome that we cannot predict or spend money we simply do not have,” she said, adding that “you can’t spend revenue you don’t have.” She acknowledged that “it’s unfortunate that the deficit is a result of direct costs incurred by education.”

In relation to the discussion surrounding UCT, Siroonian said, “I’m getting really irritated that it keeps coming up and people think we’re going to jockey for position for that money. We can’t. We have a fiscal responsibility.”

She added that if the town were to receive money in connection with the matter, “by policy and by statute, that money goes to free cash and that money has to be available to all departments.”

“I struggle with the $41 million budget for education. It’s roughly for 1,500 students, right? I’m not saying they don’t deserve it, but there’s revenue that you don’t have.” BPS has a total enrollment of 1,478 students.

Thanking Mastrangelo and Siroonian for their input, Beals said that the School Committee wants to work with the board, but she cited rain being caught by buckets in classrooms, teachers spending their own money on supplies and the aging school building.

Prefacing that she acknowledges the efforts that the town has made to minimize the deficit, Quinlan-Zhou added that the school district has had to do the same thing in the face of growing demands and is in line with surrounding school districts.

“This is what education costs,” Quinlan-Zhou said, noting that the School Department utilizes various sources of competitive funding to offset expenses. She noted that, similar to the town’s pressure points of retirement and health insurance, out-of-district special education costs have risen not only for Bourne, but for the entire state.

“I always believe in the scalpel and not the butcher knife,” she said. “We want to help and we’ll look at places that have changed from the time we presented.”

One of the areas that has been reexamined is the structure of the 5th grade, which was on the cusp of becoming a seven-track program for which BPS had planned to establish a position. A track refers to the number of homeroom blocks in a grade.

Quinlan-Zhou said that she believed that, assuming enrollment stays the same, the 5th grade can continue to operate with six homeroom blocks. After discussing the matter with Bourne Middle School Principal Lisa Sleboda, Quinlan-Zhou said, “We feel pretty confident that we could cut that position,” which was budgeted for $76,000.

“We need to go through our process and see what’s possible and until we know specifically what the number it is that [the Select Board] is looking for to close the gap, I think then we’ll be able to have those conversations,” Quinlan-Zhou said, adding that she hopes that DESE will rectify the UCT enrollment discrepancies and that updated cherry sheets will be publicized.

Continuing the discussion, Mastrangelo said that “when we have a deficit, it means you do not have enough revenue to cover the expenses,” meaning that either the town needs to get $478,532 or cut $478,532.

“It’s a very complex system,” Mastrangelo said of the free cash certification. “At the end of the year, whatever money we have, they give us our free cash certification. And if there are funds encumbered, that comes off our free cash certification. So if we don’t get turnbacks, that gives us less money for next year.”

With the process taking until early fall to find out how much free cash was certified, “there are no guarantees except for the fact that when we go to Town Meeting, we have to have zero deficit,” Mastrangelo said.

Heaney asked who was responsible for the $478,532 deficit. The Select Board makes the decision on how the cuts are shared and expenses reduced, McCollem said.

The deficit had decreased by $250,636 when Forget informed McCollem on March 2 that the UCT’s budget assessment decreased after the addresses of 14 UCT students, who had been incorrectly assessed as Bourne residents, were corrected. Additional discrepancies were identified for another 12 students; DESE has not yet addressed those.

Mastrangelo suggested that both the Select Board and Finance Committee continue to examine the school’s budget and the town’s budget, which was met with general agreement. However, “if we can’t balance it, then the question becomes do we want to ask for money in an override to cover the school budget,” she added.

Beals asked about what would happen if additional students were to enter the school system. Quinlan-Zhou noted that the Bourne Public Schools does have a “volatility in enrollment…We’re always welcoming kids.” Referencing her previous suggestion to cut the planned position, that if in August the enrollment were to increase and require a seven-track for 5th grade to maintain class size, she is “hiring another teacher.” Adding, “We’ve got to figure out how to make it work.”

Beals said that the Facilities and Budgets Subcommittee will meet on Friday, March 13, to discuss the matter and share findings with the School Committee the following week.

McCollem asked the Select Board, “If I get the School Committee’s potential reduction on Wednesday night, do you want me to then fill the [remaining deficit] with town cuts?”

McCollem “could identify possible cuts that night,” Mastrangelo suggested. “Until we know what they could come up with, it’s hard to determine.” She added that if what the School Committee proposes and what McCollem proposes does not cover the deficit, then “we have to go to the Finance Committee budget meeting and have a conversation about the town’s priorities” and “we should have a balanced budget” at the end of the meeting.

McCollem said that would not be possible since she is obligated to notify the unions of cuts. “I do not want [town] employees to hear at a public meeting that they’re losing their jobs,” she said.

Quinlan-Zhou asked if DESE had provided a response to the letter sent by the Select Board. Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti and Siroonian said that they have not heard back, adding that no assumptions can be made about DESE returning funds back to the Town of Bourne in connection with the 12 additional UCT students who had been incorrectly assessed as Bourne residents, or that those funds could even balance the budget.

Before the joint meeting was adjourned, Beals said she wanted to tell the parents and guardians of BPS students that “we will make sure that the educational needs of all of our Bourne students are taken care of while also remaining mindful of the fiscal realities facing the town.”

Ferretti thanked the School Committee and the School Department for their efforts before adding that it has been a “hard year” that “we’re all trying to work through,” and that “we’re feeling it on the other side.”

“It’s nice that we can come together, though, to try to figure it all out, and we’ll get there,” Beals said.
