Title: Bourne Select Board Hears Scenic Highway Median Project
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-02-06T00:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-select-board-hears-scenic-highway-median-project/article_6d7587ed-8c75-44bd-986e-8f246d95d9b0.html

The Bourne Select Board heard from the Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) District 5 team on January 27 about the ongoing project to install a raised, four-feet-wide, concrete center median along approximately 1.5 miles of Scenic Highway from Nightingale Pond Road to Edgehill Road.

Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) officials have asserted that the barrier, along with other measures, will improve safety along the well-traveled highway.

Having won the contract bid for the project in June, Lawrence Lynch Corp. is “actively working,” Michael Zuzevich, assistant construction engineer at MassDOT, said. “We’ve installed signage, erosion control and they’re prepping to ship out the soil on the project to facilitate further construction.” A temporary barrier was also installed to “facilitate future construction operations.”

Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo asked for an overview of what the project will entail and hopes to accomplish.

Brett Fiocchi, section manager at HNTB, which serves as a consultant for MassDOT, said the goal of the project is to “separate the contraflow, the two different directions of travel,” citing the many fatal crossover crashes that have occurred on the road.

Other improvements to the road were proposed after a road safety audit in 2014 that revealed a significant number of crashes, high speeds, lack of shoulders and more. In addition to the raised center median separating eastbound and westbound traffic, MassDOT plans to widen the road with improvements to lanes and shoulders, and improve drainage to reduce the probability of hydroplaning during rainstorms and icing in the winter.

“This is basically phase one of a bigger master plan for MassDOT of this corridor,” Fiocchi said.

The project will also include a 10-feet-wide pedestrian/bicycle path on the canal side of the road that will be separated from vehicular traffic by a guardrail, new traffic and pedestrian signals, pavement markings and signage, retaining walls and vegetation management.

Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti, who also serves as the chairwoman of the Herring Pond Wampanoag Tribe, said she has had several Tribal citizens and town residents contact her in regard to the archaeological studies and construction work.

“I did see that there was some conversation related to section 106 or the federally recognized tribes,” Ferretti said, referring to section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966. “Because that area is certainly close enough to burial grounds and some other important archaeological-sensitive areas, especially pertinent to the Herring Pond Wampanoag Tribal homelands.”

“Is there anyone overseeing all this digging that is currently happening? Are there studies that can be sent that can be located…more easily?” she asked.

Lauren McDonald of HNTB said, per the Section 106 process, MassDOT conducted archaeological surveys and reviewed past surveys. A survey in 2023 stated that there was a “low archaeological sensitivity to the area of direct impact for the project,” McDonald said.

She added that if sensitive materials, such as bones, are discovered during construction, MassDOT has procedures in place and that it is part of the contract documentation.

Ferretti asked if it was the Public Archaeological Survey (PAL) that did the aforementioned studies. McDonald said that typically, MassDOT’s Cultural Resources Unit (CRU) does that in-house, but that she does believe “they use PAL as a subconsultant for some of these studies. I’m just not certain if they did for this project.”

While the studies are not public information in order to “protect these resources,” McDonald said she would have MassDOT CRU follow up with Ferretti due to her role as a Tribal leader.

Mastrangelo asked whether any improvements would be made on Nightingale Pond Road, such as a turn lane, citing crashes that have occurred while someone is waiting to turn left.

“That is right at the beginning limits of the project,” Fiocchi said. “It was determined early on in preliminary design because of the ongoing design of the Bourne Bridge…we were trying to limit our impact to that area, knowing that there was a bigger project coming down that pike.”

Select Board member Peter J. Meier inquired about the possibility of lowering the speed limit on Scenic Highway, as well as adding signage to advise drivers of upcoming intersections.

“It’s still a very dangerous highway, even with this project, so I’m glad we’re doing it, but it’s certainly more to think about for this town in relation to security and safety,” Ferretti said.
