Title: Bourne Select Board Approves Donating Former Fire Station Parcel To MassDOT
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-04-10T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-select-board-approves-donating-former-fire-station-parcel-to-massdot/article_b5274f0a-718f-4828-998d-6d7771f35bf0.html

The Bourne Select Board approved the donation of 1025 Scenic Highway—the location of the demolished former fire station—to the Massachusetts Department of Transportation for the construction of the new Sagamore Bridge. The board’s approval is subject to Special Town Meeting approval in the fall.

At its meeting on Tuesday , April 7 , the board discussed the request made by MassDOT Megaprojects Executive Director Luisa Paiewonsky “that the Town consider transferring the parcel at no cost to the Commonwealth,” which was made in a letter dated March 6. Paiewonsky had appeared before the board on March 3 to inform it of MassDOT’s request.

“We believe that the public improvements, particularly the bicycle and pedestrian paths, will directly benefit Bourne residents, and are making the request consistent with prior agreements throughout the Commonwealth,” Paiewonsky wrote in the letter. “We understand that this is a Town decision and would be happy to discuss the issue further at your convenience.”

Since Route 3 and Route 6 are being moved to the west for the new bridge, the on-ramp coming from Scenic Highway onto Sagamore Bridge is being moved to this parcel to ensure designs align with current standards. A bike and pedestrian pathway over the bridge will also be included.

While the ramp and pathway would be located in the northern corner of the parcel, the rest of the property would be needed to construct the improvements, and the property would be needed long-term to perform maintenance on those properties.

“I have no problem with donating the land to the commonwealth. We really have no use for it,” Select Board member Peter J. Meier stated. “We are just doing our part as part of the project,” referencing the Cape Cod bridges replacement.

Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo inquired what the process would be. Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem said that MassDOT needs “feedback about if you are willing to donate it. And if you are, then we will line up a Town Meeting article for the fall.” The article would be “to give up the interest in real estate,” she added.

Mastrangelo weighed soliciting more input versus donating the land, to which Meier responded, “What are we going to do with it? There is really no access to it; it is landlocked.”

Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti reiterated that the purpose of donating the parcel to MassDOT is to build the bridges. “It is not like they are taking it just to take it. It is for a reason.”

Vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian, clerk Jeanne L. Azarovitz, Meier and Ferretti voted “yes” to approve the donation of the parcel to MassDOT, subject to Special Town Meeting’s approval in the fall. Mastrangelo abstained from voting.
