Title: Bourne Resident Shaves Her Hair For Childhood Cancer Fundraiser
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-20T13:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-resident-shaves-her-hair-for-childhood-cancer-fundraiser/article_f42eb49a-085b-421e-a5b4-64cc8dc59de3.html

This will not be Susan Caffrey’s first time shaving her hair in the name of fundraising and raising awareness for childhood cancer.

A resident of Monument Beach, Caffrey will participate in this year’s One Mission Buzz Off for Kids with Cancer. The fundraiser will be virtual, allowing Caffrey to have her friend and hairstylist Hanna Leach, a co-owner of The Studio On 28A, shave her hair with the Lobster Trap Restaurant’s mural as the backdrop. Those interested in supporting Caffrey as she buzzes off her hair can visit the restaurant on Friday, May 29, at 4:30 PM.

Caffrey had previously raised funds for One Mission in 2022 , after the charity had reached out to her. “It found me,” she said, noting it was around that time that she had decided to stop dyeing her hair.

Welcoming the opportunity and happy to participate, Caffrey raised more than $5,000 in 2022 for the One Mission Buzz Off, which was held that year at Gillette Stadium in Foxborough.

Describing the event as “emotional” and “heartwarming” with children impacted by cancer and their families present, she said she knew she wanted to do it again in the future.

With a fundraising goal of $7,500 this year, Caffrey said donations are “halfway there.”

One Mission, a nonprofit Massachusetts-based pediatric cancer charity, was founded by Ashley and Ari Haseotes in 2008 after their 7-month-old son was diagnosed with leukemia and they recognized the need for additional aid.

One Mission is “a charity focused on improving the day-to-day life of kids fighting cancer and their families,” its website states.

The Buzz Off is one of One Mission’s many initiatives. Last year it funded hospital parking passes, special occasion parties, music therapy sessions and family-catered meals for more than 4,000 children fighting cancer and their families.

It is a “great cause,” Caffrey said. Mission One “meets all qualifications for charitable organizations.”

The charity has partnered with Boston Children’s Hospital, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Massachusetts General Hospital, Brigham & Women’s Hospital and Hasbro Children’s Hospital in Providence, Rhode Island. It also partners with Rett’s Roost and Camp Casco to provide supportive events and activities for children and their families who have been impacted by cancer.

While Caffrey will buzz her hair off, participants in the fundraiser also have the choice to cut and donate their hair or dye it bright colors, with the goal of all three options raising awareness.

Those interested in donating to Caffrey can do so by visiting mybuzzoff.org/page/susieqsbuzzoff2 , by Venmo at SusanCaffrey or by visiting Gray Gables Market at 185 Shore Road in Bourne. The fundraiser will be open until June 30.

Gray Gables Market owners Russ and Erin Salamone allowed Caffrey, who works as a cashier at the market, to place a donation jar for the fundraiser at the checkout counter.

“Customers have been generous,” Caffrey said. “It’s amazing how quickly it adds up.”

After Caffrey completes the Buzz Off at the Lobster Trap Restaurant mural, people can join her at the restaurant, where drink and merchandise specials will be available. Portions of the proceeds will be donated to the fundraiser.

Caffrey, whose daughter works at the restaurant, said she was met by enthusiasm when she reached out to Lobster Trap manager Jenny Norton to collaborate.

The Lobster Trap Restaurant is at 290 Shore Road in Bourne, with the Buzz Off being held at the restaurant’s lower parking lot near the mural.
