Title: Bourne ISWM Temporarily Suspends Commerical Brush, Yard Waste Acceptance
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-08T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-iswm-temporarily-suspends-commerical-brush-yard-waste-acceptance/article_746e3a9c-4760-46ef-8e18-4509d1f33505.html

The Bourne Department of Integrated Solid Waste Management (ISWM) has temporarily suspended acceptance of commercial brush and yard waste. This change will not affect residential users.

ISWM General Manager Dan Barrett and Operations Manager Asa Mintz spoke before the Bourne Select Board on Monday , May 4 .

A press release by ISWM stated that this past winter’s storms “significantly increased the volume of material in recent weeks and this, combined with major site operations, necessitated a temporary pause.”

“It looked like somebody had flipped a switch,” Barrett said of the sudden, sharp increase in commercial brush and yard waste. “We were working along; 14, 15 loads a day commercially. All of a sudden, we jump to 71, 61, 81, 91.”

To combat the influx of brush, ISWM ground “about 75% of the pile,” which resolved the problem for “a couple of weeks,” he said; however, eventually the pile grew “as big as it was before.”

This became dangerous when, Barrett said, “we were running out of room.” He described how 235-ton rock trucks, loaders and other equipment were dropping off and processing the commercial loads while residents were “backed up against the wall, trying to dump the brush.”

“It’s not something we normally do,” Barrett said of the decision to temporarily pause acceptance of commercial brush and yard waste. He noted that ISWM’s reasoning to continue to accept brush from residents is that “the facility is there for the residents primarily. We went commercial to help people out.”

Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo inquired about communications with commercial customers. Barrett had previously stated that he discussed the matter and informed many local commercial customers of the decision, but he added that commercial customers can continue to call the ISWM facility to check the status. The ISWM facility telephone number is 508-759-0600, extension 4241.

Barrett noted that the Cape-wide increase in brush and wood chips has made it so “we can’t move chips out as quickly as we could,” limiting the amount of space available.

In response to Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian’s question about the size of the commercial trucks, Barrett replied that “the volume kills us. And if we can get the grinder in there, then we can keep stacking it up.”

However, he noted that stacking it up too high also has its limits, such as fires. Large, dry piles may spontaneously combust due to internal heat generation, especially as the weather gets hotter.

Mintz reiterated that the ISWM facility was experiencing large amounts of light brush as well.

A determination will be made at a later date as to when acceptance of commercial brush and yard waste will resume. “We’re working on it, and we’ll get it there as quickly as we can,” Barrett said.

He also shared his appreciation for the patience of Bourne residents regarding operational and logistical changes at the ISWM facility.

Select Board members thanked Barrett and Mintz for the update, as well as explaining the circumstances and the decision, with several members also sharing their understanding of the ongoing clean-up from the winter’s storms.

More information about the temporary pause in acceptance of commercial brush and yard waste can be found on the town’s website at bourne-ma.gov/m/newsflash/home/detail/46 .
