Title: Bourne Board of Health Enforces Tobacco Violation
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-04-24T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-board-of-health-enforces-tobacco-violation/article_1acf27da-2381-4981-8bb8-33d2e9698ba4.html

A recent tobacco violation that was enforced by the Bourne Board of Health was discussed during the group’s meeting held on Wednesday , April 22 .

It was the first violation for the sale of a tobacco product to a person under the age of 21, for Cape Cod Smoke Shop, located at 4 Barlows Landing Road in Suite 6 in Pocasset.

The board continued discussing the matter from a prior meeting, which was postponed due to a lack of quorum on April 8, as board chairman Robert D. Collett IV abstained from voting because of his position as director of the Cape Cod Regional Tobacco Control Program (CCRTCP).

Per regulations, the store faces a $1,000 fine and a one-business day suspension of its Tobacco Product Sales Permit after the CCRTCP conducted a routine tobacco compliance check at the establishment.

During the one-day suspension, all tobacco nicotine products will be removed from the shelves and locked in a secured area on the premises, which the Bourne Health Department staff shall be able to access to verify that those steps have been taken.

The sale of a Zyn, a brand of nicotine pouch, to a minor was “a shock for me,” store owner Ian O. Coyne said before the board on April 8, as he apologized. “I understand the seriousness of the situation and take full responsibility for the mistake,” he said.

“The individual appeared to be within my general age group, which is late 20s, early 30s. That contributed to my misjudgment,” he said. “I recognize the importance of verifying information.”

Board member William “Dusty” Meier stated the importance of checking people’s identification regardless of their perceived age.

The underage individual who was sold the tobacco problem was an “18-year-old young man. He has got a little bit of facial hair,” Collett noted, adding that “If you look closely at somebody [you] usually can tell within a couple of years a person’s approximate age.”

Board member Donald J. Ellis stated that “removing judgment from the process” would be his recommended approach to avoid a similar situation in the future, and inquired what Coyne would do to ensure it does not happen again.

Coyne replied that he would be stricter about asking for identification, which he said would include asking people who appear to be in their 30s.

Appreciative of Coyne’s new plan, Ellis said: “I am never insulted when I go into a liquor store at my age, and I am asked for an ID.”

Collett noted the importance of being cognizant of asking all of the store’s patrons for identification and suggested to “make a joke about it if you have to ask them for the IDs.”

He also proposed that Coyne invest in a scanner to avoid a repeat of the situation, to which Coyne replied he would continue his search for a scanner system.

“I have never had a violation with any other ban,” he said. “I would like to say I have a good standing with the town, and I would like to keep it as such,” Collet replied that he does.

Citing this as his first offense in approximately eight years of operation and his passing of 10 compliance checks conducted by the state, Coyne inquired whether the board would consider reducing the fine.

Collett stated that the penalty cannot be amended “because this is the way the state law and the local regulation is written.”

The board finalized the penalty for the violation on Wednesday, having achieved a quorum without Collett. The board voted to approve the motion to have the date of the one-day tobacco sales permit suspension be finalized between Bourne Health Department and Coyne, and that the $1,000 fine be paid in full prior to the renewal of the store’s tobacco license in December 2026.
