Title: Bourne Select Board Grants Affordable Housing Trust's Extension Request
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-04-17T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-select-board-grants-affordable-housing-trusts-extension-request/article_980d7ec9-6cad-4bfd-8f2c-b71a47afaa77.html

After the Bourne Affordable Housing Trust and Housing Partnership requested an extension of the deadline to accept or decline the former police station at 173 Main Street in Buzzards Bay for use as affordable housing, the Select Board voted to extend the deadline by six months at its meeting on Tuesday , April 14 .

Through the Town of Bourne’s enrollment in the Shared Regional Housing Services (SRHS), the Affordable Housing Trust will be able to utilize its services to assist in identifying the best use of the land, planning, funding and requests for proposals.

The SRHS program was initiated in 2023 to combat the housing crisis on Cape Cod. The program was fully funded until June 30, using funding secured by then-President Joseph R. Biden Jr.’s American Rescue Plan Act, which offered $350 billion to municipalities to help the nation recover in the wake of the pandemic.

Now supported by an Intermunicipal Agreement among the 13 towns involved, the program is county-wide and has already supported the development of a regional housing database and the development of universal templates for common affordable housing documents, and is providing technical assistance with specific projects in the participating towns.

However, SRHS requests that the trust and partnership “hire an engineer to do a site analysis to see if the building could be saved or broken down before they could get involved,” Affordable Housing chairwoman Susan Ross explained in a letter to the board, dated March 9. In turn, the trust and partnership hired Leonardi Aray of Leonardi Aray Architects to conduct both a physical and pragmatic assessment.

“We need more time to do all this,” Ross said. “We did not really want to start it without getting a deadline approved by you, because we do not want to put money into something that we won’t have.”

Ross said she has heard from multiple community members who would like to see a mixed-use affordable housing development on Main Street, noting the goal of providing housing to the community’s workforce.

Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo inquired about the length of the extension, to which Ross replied that ideally it would be until “the end of the summer, maybe into the fall.”

Ross explained that this extension would allow Aray to present his findings to a joint meeting of Bourne Affordable Housing Trust and Housing Partnership and Select Board, after which the trust and partnership would seek SRHS input before applying for funding. Ross noted that SRHS wanted “the plans before they want to do the funding, so we have to put money in ourselves, so that is what we are doing.”

“I think you’re going in the right direction,” Mastrangelo said. “The property is not an easy decision, so I am totally supportive of a six-month extension if that will work for you.”

Ross agreed and stated that the trust and partnership will present updates to the board regularly over the course of that time frame.

Select Board member Peter J. Meier agreed that the six-month extension is “reasonable,” noting that “if we do a phased approach and just take out time, I think it will work out for everybody in the end.”

The trust and partnership are “putting their heart and soul into this…It is not something that is being done haphazardly. They really want to make sure this works,” Meier said, adding that through this initiative, the Town of Bourne is investing in affordable housing.

The board unanimously voted to approve a six-month extension on the deadline to accept or decline the property.
