Title: Bourne Select Board Briefs: Marina Update, Approves BANs Sale, Supports SAFER Grant
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-06-17T12:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-select-board-briefs-marina-update-approves-bans-sale-supports-safer-grant/article_8182614e-f591-4999-a073-d027acb64da7.html

Bourne Deparment of Natural Resources Director Hannah Lawrence provided an update on the status of the Monument Beach marina expansion project to the Bourne Select Board at its meeting on June 9.

Since Town Meeting members voted to authorize the use of Community Preservation Act (CPA) funds at the Special Town Meeting in October 2025 to fund the first phase of a capital project to renovate and expand the Monument Beach Marina, the Bourne Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the Shore and Harbor Committee have been laying the groundwork for the project.

CPA funds can be spent on several types of projects, including affordable housing, historic preservation, and open space/recreation.

Currently in the “early stages” of the project’s feasibility study, “this phase of the project will address and focus on the waterfront portion of the marina, such as the pier, docks, floats, marina footprint, utilities and fuel amenities and other potential waterside improvements,” Lawrence wrote in an email to the Enterprise on June 10.

Lawrence emphasized that the marina has served the community for approximately 75 years; however, “the infrastructure has reached a point where a comprehensive evaluation and long-term redevelopment plan is necessary to ensure the marina can continue to serve the community for decades to come.”

After the town issued a request for qualifications for design services on April 17, eight firms responded before the May 13 deadline. The firms are BSC Group, Epsilon Associates Inc, Foth Infrastructure & Environment LLC, GEI Consultants, Geosyntec Consultants Inc, GZA GeoEnvironmental Inc, Langan Engineering & Environmental Services LLC and Tighe & Bond.

Evaluated by Lawrence, Town Engineer Timothy Lydon, Director of Public Works Matthew Sawicki and Shore and Harbor chairman Richard Libin, the top three firms were identified based on “evaluation criteria,” Lawrence said.

After interviewing the top three firms, Foth Infrastructure & Environment LLC, GEI Consultants and Geosyntec Consultants Inc, it was recommended to the town administrator that Foth Infrastructure & Environment LLC conduct the design services for the project.

Lawrence shared that a contract was signed with Foth on June 5. She added that a kickoff meeting between two Foth team members and representatives from Shore and Harbor Committee, the Department of Public Works and Natural Resources, Engineering and Conservation departments was to be held on June 12 “to discuss the approach and lay out the path forward.”

***

The Bourne Select Board voted to approve the sale of bond anticipation notes (BANs), totaling $4,553,000, on June 9.

BANs are a “short-term debt instrument used to generate cash for initial project costs and with the expectation that the debt will be replaced later by permanent bonding,” states the Massachusetts Department of Revenue’s Municipal Finance Glossary. Typically sold by town governments as a way of generating money for large capital projects, BANs are “issued for a term of less than one year” and can be “re-issued for up to five years, provided principal repayment begins after two years.”

The funds generated from the sale of BANs will “cover the cash flow for…the south side fire station construction through January, which will then fall in line with our regular financing schedule,” Bourne Finance Director Erica Flemming said.

During last May’s Town Meeting and town election, residents voted in favor of authorizing the town to borrow $18.8 million to cover the cost of building a new fire station south of the Cape Cod Canal at 171 Clay Pond Road.

The Bourne Select Board had written a letter to Healey’s office requesting that the special legislation be filed at the State House after an issue arose with the ballot question seeking authorization to borrow those funds.

Due to the improper posting, those election results were invalid. As a result, Flemming was unable to borrow to cover the costs of construction until the issue had been resolved.

After special legislation—H. 4763, An Act validating the results of the annual election held in the Town of Bourne on May 20, 2025—was passed by the State Senate and House and signed by Governor Maura T. Healey, it took immediate effect, as it was filed as an emergency law.

The town received three bids for the project. Flemming noted that the town is “awarding to the lowest bidder with the net interest cost of 2.784, which is going to be awarded to Truist Securities, Inc.” She added that the coupon rate is 3.75% and includes a premium in the amount of 27,000.”

The sale of BANS was unanimously approved.

***

On June 9, the Select Board unanimously voted to grant Fire Chief David S. Pelonzi’s request for the board’s support in his pursuit of the FEMA Staffing For Adequate Fire and Emergency Response (SAFER) grant.

Pelonzi explained that the grant would address the Fire Department’s staffing constraints amid increased emergency demand.

Through the grant, the department is seeking to fund the position of four firefighter/EMTs or paramedics, adding one per shift. Pelonzi noted that if the grant were awarded, it “would allow us to maintain a dedicated fire engine staffing 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, restoring staffing to previously maintained operational levels.”

This project would have a total cost of approximately $1.9 million. FEMA’s contribution, through the grant, would be around $1.1 million, and the Town of Bourne’s share would be $728,874 over the course of three years. “This represents a strong federal partnership with roughly a dollar fifty in federal support for every local dollar invested,” Pelonzi noted.

“The long-term objective is not expansion; it’s stabilization. It’s to transition these positions into a sustained baseline staffing model that aligns with current and projected emergency demand,” he stated.

The department’s emergency call volume has increased around 54% over the course of the past 20 years, Pelonzi stated, adding that, in comparison, staffing has only increased 11% during the same timeframe. He also noted that instances of simultaneous calls, use of mutual aid, and callback of off-duty personnel “aren’t rare events; they’re routinely operational conditions.”

Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian inquired about the logistics of funding four additional positions, asking, “Does it have to be four?” Pelonzi explained that the proposal calls for four shifts, so adding a person per shift is preferred.

“We could look at other staffing models; we just wouldn’t have 24/7 coverage,” he said.

Prefacing her support for Pelonzi applying for the grant and noting the positive impact that a previous implementation of a SAFER grant had on the Fire Department, Select Board clerk Mary Jane Mastrangelo cited Finance Director Erica Flemming’s report and the need to examine how the town will fund its share.

Flemming had conducted an analysis based on the town’s use of ambulance funds to cover its share. Using conservative estimates, Flemming reported that “since the costs are more than revenues collected, the ambulance fund is not a viable funding source to support the entire cost. Other funding will need to be allocated to support the additional costs.”

However, Mastangelo said “I think we should go for the SAFER grant and if we get it, I think we can comfortably look at the first two years under the ambulance fund and then have a discussion about how we’re going to fund the rest.”

Select Board member Peter J. Meier agreed with Mastrangelo, adding that in order to maintain its services, the town has to pay. “We’re going to have to have the long-term conversations afterwards and we’re going to have to figure out a way to pay for the other four up the road,” Meier said. “If we don’t have the revenue coming in…then we’re going to have to figure out where the money is going to come from.”

In support of Pelonzi applying for the grant and the “opportunity,” Siroonian did note that “you can’t help but be concerned about the long term and sustaining it.” She added that if the town were to receive the grant, “then down the road, at the appropriate time,” the town should be “looking at fiscal year budgets.”

Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti stated her support for applying for the grant as “it’s needed,” but also expressed her concern about finding and sustaining the town’s share of funding the proposals.

After board member Jeanne L. Azarovitz seconded Meier’s motion to support Pelonzi filing an application for the SAFER grant, the board unanimously voted 5-0.
