Title: Bourne Select Board Discusses MOU For Bridges Project, Requests Information For MassDOT Meeting
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-03T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-select-board-discusses-mou-for-bridges-project-requests-information-for-massdot-meeting/article_0d793a4d-c6bc-45ec-acd9-c6bfe36e9b66.html

In relation to the Cape Cod bridges replacement project, the Bourne Select Board discussed its comments in preparation for an upcoming design public hearing and developing a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the Massachusetts Department of Transportation at its meeting on Tuesday , June 30 .

“MassDOT has been more than willing to come to the table when things come up,” board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian said in regard to the project’s impacts on the Canal Service Road and Keith Field. “But I think we need a more formal process between the Select Board and MassDOT.”

Through an MOU, the Town of Bourne and MassDOT would be able to reach an understanding and “lay out expectations and responsibilities and clarify things and codify tentative agreements and get them in writing,” Siroonian said, adding that it would be a moving document due to the project’s nature. Board member Peter J. Meier also envisioned it as a “fluid document.”

Emphasizing the importance of the MOU, she stated that it could outline plans to mitigate traffic. Board member Jeanne L. Azarovitz suggested that the MOU could also feature topics that may be impacted by the project, such as the fire and police departments’ abilities to respond, evacuation procedures, multi-modal transportation and ensuring that staging areas do not extend outside of established bounds.

“This is going to be a long-term project, so starting up with a memorandum of understanding that is going to live beyond some of these discussions we’re having now,” Azarovitz noted, adding how various circumstances in which an MOU would have been helpful arose while the board was “waiting to have this discussion,” which made us more aware of the long-term.”

Chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti noted that in regard to the project’s impact on traffic, the MOU could take into consideration seasonal differences, noting how Bourne’s population doubles in the summer.

“I think it’s a good idea,” board clerk Mary Jane Mastrangelo said, emphasizing the need for a way to process communication: “If there is an issue or if there is work anticipated, how are we going to know that? How is it going to be communicated? How are we going to prevent issues?”

To Mastrangelo’s point, Siroonian suggested “having a peer review, a professional specific to traffic,” to assist the town in regard to the project.

Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem recommended that the town meet with and request assistance from the Cape Cod Commission in developing an MOU with MassDOT. “That’s a role that the regional planning agencies can play and they have the traffic resources and transportation resources that we just don’t have.”

After Mastrangelo seconded a motion made by Meier to engage in discussion with the Cape Cod Commission to assist with developing an MOU, the board unanimously voted affirmatively. On Wednesday , July 1 , McCollem sent an email to the Cape Cod Commission to convey the board’s decision.

Taking note of the challenges and difficulties that the bridges project will impose on residents and the town, Ferretti emphasized the benefits that will come as a result of the replacement of the almost two 100-year-old bridges.

Several Bourne residents—Rob Manson, John York and Peter Murner—and Bourne Pedestrian Bicycle Pathway Advisory Committee chairman Kenneth A. Cheitlin spoke at the meeting as well, all providing various suggestions on how the Town of Bourne can use the MOU as an opportunity to ensure that the town’s interests and recommendations are factored into the development of the project.

In light of the public design hearing that MassDOT is holding at the Bourne High School on Thursday, July 23, from 6 to 8 PM, the Select Board discussed what comments it had ahead of the meeting.

Board members and McCollem all stated that they have not received information pertaining to the content of the presentation as of Tuesday.

In light of this, McCollem recommended to the board that it formally request that MassDOT make public, in advance of the hearing on July 23, the specifications, plans and other documents that it will present.

“I think we should anticipate that this is our opportunity to speak about anything to do with the Sagamore Bridge replacement before the contract procurement happens,” McCollem told the board.

York noted that the design public hearing is also the 25% design public hearing. “Project plans are presented to a public forum early at the 25% design stage for information and opportunity to comment,” MassDOT’s project glossary index stated. York also informed the board of a MassDOT guideline that outlines what is covered at the 25% design public hearing.

Murner stated that this encapsulated the need of having the MOU established, or at least request it, before the July 23 meeting.

Mastrangelo made a motion based on McCollem’s aforementioned suggestion, which was seconded by Meier. The board then unanimously voted to approve the motion. On Wednesday, McCollem sent an email to MassDOT per the board’s vote.
