Title: Bourne Bike Path Committee Seeks Next Steps For Rail Trail Project
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-04-15T13:15:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-bike-path-committee-seeks-next-steps-for-rail-trail-project/article_b95af037-d1e3-4546-8d85-32ecc7f9d625.html

To gain direction from the Bourne Select Board, the Bourne Town Administrator’s Advisory Committee on Pedestrian Bicycle Pathway voted to schedule to meet with the Select Board to discuss the future of the rail trail project, including phase one, at its meeting on Monday , April 13 .

The committee had been advising the town administrator on the construction of a bike and pedestrian pathway proposed to be built along the Falmouth secondary (F2) rail line as part of a rail-with-trail project.

At a prior meeting, the committee had voted 4-1 to recommend to Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem a delay in bidding the first phase of the rail-with-trail project, which would run along the tracks from Monument Neck Road at John Stackpole Memorial Park to the existing Cape Cod Canal Bike Path. Phase one totaled at $10.2 million.

The delay was recommended after the Massachusetts Department of Transportation’s plans featured changes that proposed a terminus in Stackpole Park. Residents of the Gray Gables neighborhood also expressed their disagreement with the potential of both disturbance to existing amenities and increased traffic.

Mary Jane Mastrangelo, who serves as the Select Board’s representative on the committee, noted that the committee had asked “for a delay in bidding the project until those questions that people had could be resolved.”

Mastrangelo proposed meeting with the Select Board to discuss what the next steps are for the projects and what the committee should focus on. “We haven’t done that since August,” she added.

“How are we going to resolve the concerns with the design if we don’t talk to the Select Board about the concerns with the design?” Mastrangelo asked. “What does the Select Board and the Bike Path Committee feel is a resolution? How do we talk to MassDOT about a resolution? What are the possible next steps?”

Committee interim chairman Kenneth A. Cheitlin said, “More information from the board, the better.” However, he noted that the committee’s last vote on the matter was to “endorse pulling the track to build the trail, and that was in part, I think, basis for our decision as a committee to recommend that we delay phase one.”

Mastrangelo emphasized the need for the town to resume conversations with MassDOT, noting her discomfort in being in a “win-lose situation” and not being in contact with MassDOT. “If we continue to stop the conversation, the $5 million that is still on the [Transportation Improvement Plan] is going to be lost,” she added.

She added that while she believes the best solution is a rail-to-trail approach, she reiterated that more conversation is needed with the Select Board and MassDOT regarding the next steps.

Committee members Barbara O’Donnell and Matthew Silvia agreed with Mastrangelo’s point about discussing it with the board.

Cheitlin asked Town Engineer Timothy Lydon about his opinion on MassDOT’s changes to the plans and how to address the concerns. “I think people are going to still have the same concerns about the parking in that area, no matter where a ‘perceived’ terminus is. But MassDOT wanted to make sure that they mapped out a terminus,” Lydon replied. “So if we wanted to bypass that...I think it changes what that design is.”

Mastrangelo inquired how the committee can contact MassDOT to discuss the project and options. “I think that’s the problem—there was not any kind of collaboration on the changes they made. There’s no understanding on our part.”

Referring to the previous comment, review meetings with MassDOT, Lydon replied: “I would imagine there would be another one.” He also reiterated the need for clarity and direction. “I do not want to misrepresent the town in a direction that you guys do not have a consensus on,” Lydon added, regarding prior and future conversations with MassDOT.

While Cheitlin agreed with the other members that the committee should meet with the Select Board to get direction about the rail-with-trail project, he noted that “when we got this change in design, we all decided that this was a great example of why rail-with-trail was not going to work.”

Mastrangelo reiterated that going to the board to recommend reengaging in discussion with MassDOT is “the only way we can make our case for rail-to-trail.”

Cheitlin commented that MassDOT “has no intention of doing rail-to-trail; they are not moving forward on rail-to-trail. They are only moving forward on rail-with-trail…and they’re not even doing that right now.”

He suggested that although the committee may recommend the Select Board to discuss the rail-with-trail approach, “until the governor tells MassDOT that she wants to pull the [F2] they are not going to.” He noted that the “rail and transit division has been very clear that they are not interested in pulling up that Falmouth Secondary line.”

Cheitlin proposed posing a question to the Select Board whether it would want the committee to continue to engage “with MassDOT about a phase one rail-with-trail, or do you want to say to them, ‘We are not doing rail-with-trail at any phase. We only want rail-to-trail.’”

Mastrangelo stated the importance of the Select Board refining its position on the project and holding a public meeting for residents to attend.

Last fall, the Falmouth Select Board had endorsed the removal of the tracks and the construction of the Bourne rail trail project as a rail-to-trail project and had sent a letter to Governor Maura T. Healey. Cheitlin noted that there has “been no response as far as I know.”

Cheitlin also added that the Friends of the Bourne Rail Trail, a nonprofit group of which he is the president, has gathered residents’ signatures to express citizens’ interest in the removal of the tracks to Healey.

“I know what the rail and transit’s position on rail-to-trail is, and we shouldn’t disabuse anybody with the notion that [MassDOT] is prepared to talk about that. They’re not, we’ve tried,” Cheitlin said, before adding that he agreed that the committee should meet with the Select Board.
