Title: Bourne Select Board Prepares Questions, Comments For MassDOT Public Hearing
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-22T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-select-board-prepares-questions-comments-for-massdot-public-hearing/article_50271b31-46e6-4221-b660-a479faac7254.html

In preparation for the Massachusetts Department of Transportation’s (MassDOT) design public hearing regarding the Sagamore Bridge replacement project on Thursday, July 23, from 6 to 8 PM at the Bourne High School, the Bourne Select Board formulated questions and comments at its meeting on Tuesday , July 21 .

MassDOT stated in the public hearing notice that while the hearing will focus on the "status of the project, proposed design plans, expected impacts, right-of-way, construction approaches, detours and traffic management during construction and next steps" of the Sagamore Bridge replacement project, a brief update on the Bourne Bridge replacement project will be presented as well.

Since the Select Board voted to request documents and plans in advance of Thursday night's meeting, MassDOT shared a draft version of its presentation with the Town of Bourne, which can be found on the town’s website under the Select Board packets and Department of Public Works’ tab. The draft presentation is subject to change.

After the town had received the information, board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti shared that Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem forwarded the information to several town departments.

In response, Bourne Police Chief Brandon M. Esip, Bourne Public Works Director Matthew Sawicki and Bourne Planning Board chairman John F. Duggan Jr. replied with individual memorandums, emphasizing a wide range of topics, such as the importance of emergency access, traffic management, maintenance plans, school transportation, signage and communication.

McCollem noted that she did share the memos with MassDOT.

Board member Peter J. Meier noted that he was “disappointed” in the proposed traffic management plan featured in MassDOT’s presentation, as “it looks like [MassDOT] didn’t change much” after the town had raised concerns. He added that the purpose of Thursday’s hearing is for the town to provide “constructive criticism.”

Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian emphasized the important first step of having MassDOT “accept the idea of engaging in a [memorandum of understanding]” to establish a shared agreement on a wide range of topics. Siroonian said that the MOU provides clarity on who will ensure the projects’ safety throughout the design-build process, what the checks and balances are, how those are implemented, and how responsibilities are delegated.

Agreeing with Esip, Sawicki and Duggan’s comments, she echoed their recommendations that the MOU address potential traffic and safety issues and noted the importance of the town being represented.

Siroonian also suggested that the board inquire about an updated traffic study, noting that the last one was done “pre-pandemic.” She proposed that the board ask MassDOT whether they believe that the design will “sustain…the prediction of the traffic, because I think those numbers are actually going to be drastically different.”

Noting that she could “keep going,” Siroonian listed several lines of questions that could be asked at Thursday’s meeting, such as the life cycle of the bridges regarding timeline for future repairs, impact on the industries who rely on the canal, construction phasing, and mitigating impact on the community.

Select Board member Jeanne L. Azarovitz agreed with Siroonian that the board should ask MassDOT how the design will handle current traffic trends, citing that “traffic delays are prevalent all year long,” not just in the summer, as well as installing signage to explain the traffic flow.

Communication lines among MassDOT, Bourne Town Hall, Bourne Police and Fire departments, Bourne Public Schools and the Bike and Pedestrian Committee should be established, Azarovitz proposed. She noted the significance of having a traffic management plan to ensure that emergency services can access the bridge, as well as providing regular updates to the town. Azarovitz also emphasized the need to have evacuation plans.

Noting that there should be a plan to ensure that local roads are maintained, Azarovitz proposed that navigation guides not divert highway traffic through local roads. Meier suggested that the town have MassDOT contact Waze, Google Maps and Apple to implement that. Select Board clerk Mary Jane Mastrangelo noted that this could also include mitigating large trucks using smaller, local back roads as through roads.

Engaging in an MOU would provide “clarity” to the aforementioned points as to who is responsible for what and what is expected of stakeholders, Siroonian said, before inquiring whether it was a “done deal” that the bridges would become state property. Meier replied that it was his understanding “that’s what is intended.”

“I do think that an MOU is a really critical thing we should be talking about because it gives us the opportunity to talk about how we’re going to keep it in shape,” Mastrangelo said. “We can sit here, we can throw out all these ideas, but how are they getting properly communicated as a position of the Select Board?”

Mastrangelo emphasized the importance of getting decisions between the Town of Bourne and MassDOT in writing, for example, the decisions regarding Keith Field, Sandwich Road and the Canal Service Road. She noted that, as Meier pointed out, MassDOT’s proposed plan for the detour around Canal Service Road does not reflect the most recent discussions about the need for an improved detour.

“How are we going to say that this…proposal is unacceptable for seven years of access,” she asked.

Other lines of questioning that Mastrangelo proposed were how the project’s construction could be phased to best mitigate traffic impact on the local community and how it can be ensured that transportation to and from schools properly functions.

“I do think we can negotiate some things that are going to make a quality-of-life difference in Bourne in the long run,” Mastrangelo said of the town’s opportunity to discuss transportation infrastructure in Bourne with MassDOT.

Although the new bridges would provide new infrastructure, Meier stated his concern with the proposed design’s capability to “fix the traffic,” noting that current traffic flow proves to be an “onslaught.”

“If we’re going to take over the maintenance of these bridges moving forward…we need to have a dedicated appropriation in the state budget every year for the short-term and long-term maintenance for all of these bridges,” Meier proposed.

The Town of Bourne needs to have “communication protocols” with MassDOT to allow the town and its residents to be informed throughout the project about “key points, meetings, design changes, advanced sharing of construction schedules,” Ferretti stated.

Concerned about traffic, she proposed that the town receive a “guaranteed early review diversion plan” to be able to “protect local roads.” Ferretti suggested that the traffic management plan should also feature arrangements to ensure access across the bridges for public school transportation and emergency services.

Ferretti noted that the town should be informed by MassDOT about construction stages and potential local impact, such as hours of operation, noise, restrictions and environmental and cultural considerations.

“We need to be able to know what’s going on there,” she said, emphasizing the importance of transparency and having a communication plan. “Residents need accurate information.”

Ferretti added that the town needs to have a “formal process” to review comments and documents related to the project.

Noting that the MOU should last the duration of the project, Ferretti emphasized that “the MOU should be flexible” and allow amendments as “the project evolves.”

Mastrangelo also suggested that the board inquire whether Thursday's public hearing is considered the project’s 25% design public hearing and whether there is a deadline for comments on the project’s design.

After the board members shared their suggestions for the board’s comments at Thursday’s MassDOT meeting, the next order of business was to decide who would speak on behalf of the board.

Ferretti suggested that since Siroonian and Meier are the board’s representatives on MassDOT’s Cape Cod Bridges Project Advisory Group, they present the board’s comments, as discussed, at the hearing.

A motion by Azarovitz to authorize the aforementioned was seconded by Ferretti and unanimously approved by the board.

Approximately 25 Bourne residents had gathered outside the meeting room at the Veteran’s Memorial Community Center to share their opinions and perspectives with one another before attending the Select Board’s meeting thereafter.

Ferretti prefaced that the agenda item on the board’s agenda regarding the bridge replacement program was not a public hearing; rather it would serve as a chance for the Select Board to discuss its position prior to Thursday’s meeting. “Tonight, we really do need that space to do that,” she said.

“We do appreciate everyone’s passion and concern for this,” Ferretti said to the crowd of Bourne residents in attendance. She noted that MassDOT’s public hearing on Thursday is “really the place for public comments. That’s where our citizens need to make their voices heard and have their chance to make these comments.”

With that being said, Ferretti did allow the public to share comments “as a courtesy.”

John Duggan, chairman of the Bourne Planning Board, asked for the Select Board’s support in requesting that MassDOT not schedule public hearings on the same night as scheduled Planning Board meetings. He also added that thinking “outside of the box” for solutions will be beneficial.

Noting the “Herculean task” that the Select Board has before itself, Peter Murner said that those in attendance are eager to support and advocate for the town’s interest. “We’re here to bring different perspectives. You have some really smart people here,” he said.

Christopher J. Farrell, former chairman of the Bourne Planning Board, emphasized the positive impact of having a rail line connected to Buzzards Bay as it would help alleviate the amount of vehicles along the canal

Susan Baracchini emphasized how Bourne residents can assist so the board is not alone in undertaking the magnitude of this project: “None of you have done this before. None of us have done this before, but there are a lot of smart people in the area who have experience, whether it’s career-wise, personal experience, who can interject and provide ideas of questions that we need to ask.”

She said that on Wednesday, July 22, the board should submit a request for an MOU to be established with MassDOT by Thursday’s hearing, so the request is already in writing.

Paul Alfano emphasized that the Town of Bourne should be asking and negotiating for commitments by MassDOT to the community. “All they can say is ‘No,’” he added.

Bourne Intermediate School’s Parent-Teacher Association chairwoman Meg Good Murner stated the importance of implementing a transportation plan for schools. She noted that “even this past June, we had buses arriving two hours late to school.”

Prefacing his appreciation of the Select Board as its members are required to very quickly become "experts in 50 different disciplines and then insert local knowledge into this arcane process,” Bob Dwyer noted that the board needs professional assistance. A request for “professional help that they pay for and you direct” should be featured in the MOU, he added.

Citing the power behind the town acting as a united front in its communications with MassDOT, John York suggested that the board establish standards with MassDOT regarding ensuring that it presents data and information in an accessible format and location.

Noting how the proposed plans show the new bridge on one side of his house and the off-ramp on the other, Jim Poore, of Eleanor Avenue in Sagamore, stated his concern about his property’s accessibility during construction as both he and his wife operate their businesses out of their home. His work focuses on glass repair and restoration and antiques dealing, and his wife, Cyndi Poore, operates her hair salon from her home.

He also added how items in the house shake due to the current foundation load testing being done in preparation for the new Sagamore Bridge.

Poore emphasized the need for communication between MassDOT and the town’s residents in regard to construction, asking, “What are they going to do? How are they going to help us?”

Citing her experience working with the Cape Cod Metropolitan Planning Organization, Judith Froman stated the importance of identifying “who the point people are in town, who would be working directly with getting updates, what are the resources.” She noted that it should be a “team of people.”

Froman also added that the town should request financial support from the state to fund potential professional assistance and mitigate disruptions to the local community.

Margaret Dowd suggested that the MOU should include installing infrastructure for the utilities to cross the bridges.

McCollem provided an update to the Select Board in regard to the development of an MOU.

At its last meeting on the matter on June 30, the board had unanimously authorized McCollem to contact Cape Cod Commission to inquire about utilizing their services to assist the town in developing an MOU with MassDOT.

Having since spoken to Cape Cod Commission Executive Director Kristy Senatori and Deputy Director Steven Tupper, McCollem shared that the commission will “formally respond” to the board and share what the commission “can assist with and what they maybe cannot assist with.”

While the commission did share that it cannot provide the Town of Bourne legal advice, McCollem said that it would “spend some time thinking about areas where they do have expertise that we don’t have local expertise, and how to supplement this process and guide you.”

Meier also noted that it was his understanding that the Town of Bourne has a mitigation fund with the Cape Cod Commission as well, which he proposed could also be another way to fund professional assistance.
