Title: Bourne Health Board Advocates Against Ultra-Processed Foods
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-06-26T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-health-board-advocates-against-ultra-processed-foods/article_2e26a668-4d56-4a93-b167-8d511f4fabc7.html

The Bourne Board of Health unanimously voted to send a statement, which was drafted by board clerk Dr. Miguel A. Prieto, to the Select Board and the School Committee, for their consideration and for submission to The Bourne Enterprise at its meeting on Wednesday , June 24 . The statement, which the board had voted to sign on to, stated and explained the board’s opposition to ultra-processed foods and the consumption of it, especially in schools, due to a new study revealing a correlation to an increased risk of health issues.

Prieto, who practices internal medicine, shared with the board that approximately three weeks ago, the American Journal of Public Health published a study that revealed that increased consumption of ultra-processed foods increased the risk of developing dementia by 58% and cognitive impairment by 46%.

This adds the neurological disease to the list of other chronic health problems, including type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease and diabetes, that have also been associated with ultra-processed foods.

Led by researchers at Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, the study observed more than 5,300 adults over the age of 50 for an average of nine years.

Prieto noted that the survey had “controlled for confounding socioeconomic and lifestyle variables, including education, income, smoking, physical activity and alcohol use, to isolate the impact of dietary habits.”

Ultra-processed foods are defined by nutritional researchers as “industrial formulations containing ingredients not typically found in a home kitchen. These include emulsifiers, thickeners, artificial flavorings, and high-fructose corn syrup,” Prieto had written to the board. Examples include sodas, bacon, fast food, hot dogs, chips and packaged cookies.

Prieto explained that many chemicals and modified fats, which are often found in ultra-processed foods, are filtered in the blood vessels and eventually “begin to accumulate in those blood vessels.” The impact of this in the brain is that the blood-brain barrier, which serves as a filter between the blood vessels and central nervous system, is degraded, thereby harming the brain, said Prieto.

The study also showed that diets featuring less processed foods, such as whole grains, vegetables, fresh fruit and unprocessed fish, have a 46% lower risk of developing dementia.

Prieto stated that based on his observations of medical data, “dementia is a lifestyle disease.” In the statement, Prieto outlined various ways in which “small consistent choices can make a difference,” such as favoring water over sugary beverages, substituting pre-packaged snacks for whole foods when able, recognizing and avoiding long lists of additives on ingredient labels, using simple ingredients to cook at home more often and identifying local fresh food sources.

“Eating a ham and cheese sandwich is the equivalent of smoking a cigarette in terms of harm to your health,” Prieto said. “Whether people send their kids with that, that is their choice. But at least we should not serve those in school cafeterias.”

Board vice chairwoman Margaret Reali, who chaired Wednesday’s meeting, said that “it’s egregious that we know these things about food” and still serve it at public institutions, such as schools and hospitals. “We need to just keep speaking about it,” she added.

While not all processed foods are created the same, Prieto recommended avoiding food items that have “some kind of animal protein in it, that does not need refrigeration.”

“You’re eating embalming material. They are proven to be carcinogens,” he said of ultra-processed foods. “It’s the same class as cigarettes.”

In agreement with Prieto, board chairman Robert D. Collet IV noted the prevalence of inexpensive ultra-processed foods in society: “We’re just surrounded by all of these foods, every way you go, everywhere you turn.”

“It is a public health crisis that hasn’t yet been recognized by the general public,” Collet stated, adding that the board needs to “increase our efforts of educating the public” and commending Prieto for “bringing this to the attention of the board and the public.”

Noting how “we were brought up on them as kids” not aware of the danger, board member William “Dusty” Meier emphasized the significance of informing the public of the health impacts of consuming ultra-processed foods, citing the board’s role in helping the public: “That’s what we are supposed to be here for—the protection of the public.”

“We are not legislating anything,” Prieto added. “We are just making a recommendation as a Board of Health.”
