Title: Bourne Select Board Weighs Exercising Right Of First Refusal
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-06-19T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-select-board-weighs-exercising-right-of-first-refusal/article_6a06db19-0b5b-4832-a5a3-cc91f852611a.html

The Bourne Select Board discussed the prospect of the town purchasing a .97-acre portion of land after the property’s owners sent the town a notice of intent to sell, pursuant to Chapter 61A, Section 14 of the state’s general laws, during a meeting held on June 9.

The land, which is located within the parcel at 665 Scenic Highway and 0 Bournedale Road, falls under that state statute through its agricultural use, which Town Counsel Bryan F. Bertram said is commonly referred to as chapter land.

“Chapter land is essentially land that gets sort of special tax treatment because we want to encourage certain uses like agricultural use. That’s what we have going on here,” Bertram said.

He added that “the trade-off the owner of the land makes for getting that special treatment is that the town then has right of first refusal” if the seller is converting the use of the land to something that does not align with chapter land or selling the land.

In the notice of intent to sell, the sellers, trustees of the Panhandle Trust, state that the buyers, NextGrid Energy LLC, which is a renewable power company, propose to convert the land’s use from agricultural and horticultural to commercial, industrial or residential.

Bertram then outlined a set of deadlines, which the clock began running down on the minute the notice of intent was mailed by the land’s sellers to the Bourne Select Board, Assessor’s Office, Planning Board, Conservation Commission and the state forester at the Department of Conservation and Recreation on May 26.

The board was informed by Bertram that the town has 120 days to decide to “exercise its right of first refusal or not” and “step into the shoes of that bona fide purchaser and purchase the land ourselves” for $600,000. He calculated that September 23 would be the deadline. The board would also need to hold a public hearing on the matter to understand what the town wants to do with the land.

He added that the town also has 30 days to respond to the seller to edit the document. While the document “pretty much checks the boxes,” Bertram noted that “there’s sort of a weirdness” as the purchase and sale agreement refers to the land as Chapter 61B, when the land is actually Chapter 61A, according to the Bourne Assessor’s Office. He also noted that the purchase and sale agreement that the town received did not appear to be certified, which Bertram said is required by statute.

If the board were interested in the land, Bertram recommended that the town “just move forward with the process.”

He stated that by informing the seller of the inconsistencies, the town could miss the deadlines.

Bertram added that the document that the seller provided to the town “gives us all the pertinent information we need under the statute to make a decision.”

To give the board an idea of its options, Bertram laid out three potential routes based on its decision.

If the town were not interested in buying the land, it would respond pursuant to the statute, state it is not exercising its right of first refusal and record its decision at the Registry of Deeds. If the town were interested, the decision would also be filed at the registry and the town would have 90 days to complete the purchase. The third option would be if the town wanted to “assign our first right of refusal to a nonprofit or something like that.”

Bertram did note that if the town were to be interested in purchasing the land, it would require “Town Meeting authorization to appropriate the money.”

Select Board member Peter J. Meier inquired about the logistics of the 120-day deadline and getting Town Meeting authorization and whether a Special Town Meeting would need to be called earlier than when it is usually held in October or November.

“I would say it would probably be better, if you’re really serious about acquiring this parcel, to maybe hold a Special [Town Meeting] before providing the notice, just so you know you have the funding,” Bertram said. “We could also do it in October. I think given the timing on this, you have sufficient time under the statute to provide the notice, say on the last date that you can do it or like the day before and then 90 days is going to cover you to get through the regular special in October.”

Meier then inquired if Community Preservation Act (CPA) funds could be utilized for the purchase of the land, to which Bertram said that would depend on what the town would use the land for.

CPA funds can be spent on several types of projects, including affordable housing, historic preservation, and open space/recreation.

Bertram said that, in addition to the entities that received the notice of intent from the seller, pursuant to the statute, the board should also extend the opportunity to other town departments, boards and commissions, such as the Board of Health, to share their feedback and comments on the prospect. He added that the board should also set a deadline by which town departments must share their opinions with the Select Board.

Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem noted to the Select Board that it would be beneficial to gauge the board’s interest in pursuing the process.

Select Board clerk Mary Jane Mastrangelo stated that the board should notify all of the aforementioned town entities, as well as the Open Space Committee, and set a deadline by which they must state whether they are interested in the town acquiring the parcel.

In contrast, Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti and vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian both stated they did not see a specific reason to pursue the parcel.

“I don’t see where we would be keeping it. To me, it seems like a moot point to move forward,” Ferretti said.

Mastrangelo said, although the board has not heard back from the other town departments, it “doesn’t mean that they don’t have interest.”

Meier seconded a motion by Mastrangelo to “notify all parties that were notified in the notification letter and the Open Space Committee that the Select Board would like to have an indication of their interest or non-interest” before the next meeting. In an email to the Enterprise on Tuesday , June 16 , McCollem wrote that the “deadline to submit a response is June 25, so the materials can be assembled in the Select Board’s packet for their June 30 meeting.”

Ferretti inquired about whether there is a policy that the notified parties can follow. McCollem explained that “you don’t have a local policy that requires that.”

“I’m not opposed to sending them a memo or something, but I mean, they’ve already been notified,” Ferretti said. “So I would imagine, by now, if anybody was interested, they would have contacted us to let us know.”

The board voted 3-2-0 to approve the motion, with Mastrangelo, Meier and board member Jeanne L. Azarovitz voting in the affirmative, with Siroonian and Ferretti the two dissenting votes.

The Bourne Conservation Commission, Assessor’s Office, Planning Board and Open Space Committee have all “been informed and are meeting to discuss their comments,” McCollem wrote in an email to the Enterprise on Tuesday.
