Title: Bourne Sewer Commission, Rec. Authority Resolve Sewer Fee Cost
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-01-30T00:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-sewer-commission-rec-authority-resolve-sewer-fee-cost/article_407c2805-fc15-4b07-ab40-89f7d3cf5920.html

Discussions between the Bourne Board of Sewer Commissioners and the Bourne Recreation Authority (BRA) regarding the sewer system development fee for Bourne Scenic Park resulted in a reduction to $195,900.

In 2023, the authority agreed to pay the town a one-time system development fee of $304,275 to connect Scenic Park to the town’s sewer system. The development fee is the “cost of buying into the existing infrastructure,” states the town’s sewer use rules and regulations. Debate around the cost emerged at the Sewer Commission in fall of 2025.

Department of Public Works Director Matthew Sawicki explained the calculations, which he worked on with Town Engineer Timothy Lydon. The development fee is the sum of “$75 per foot of frontage plus $11,500 per acre,” as stated in the town’s sewer regulations.

He said that they first needed to draw boundaries of a parcel around the campsite; the parcel is 16.53 acres. This was done because it is part of a much larger Army Corps parcel that runs along the canal.

Then, to calculate the development fee, Pool Road, with a frontage of 1,550 feet, was used.

“The reason we use that frontage line is that’s where the sewer is being constructed. So in our minds, the sewer is being constructed along that front line,” Sawicki said. “There is a sewer constructed on Scenic Highway, but where the sewer is being constructed for them is a sewer main running along the frontage of…Pool Road.”

Citing the preliminary allocation that was voted on in December by the Sewer Commission, which stated the connection fee was residential, with 91 residential units and 91 users, one for each, Sawicki noted the discrepancy between the aforementioned and the latest letter from BRA’s legal counsel.

The letter suggests that the frontage used for the calculations should be on Scenic Highway, equating to 105 feet. It also referenced a commercial connection fee, rather than the residential connection fee.

Jeannie Louise Kampas of La Tanzi, Spaulding & Landreth, and BRA’s legal counsel, said she appreciated the efforts to reach a resolution before explaining the contents of the letter.

“I consider it, and BRA considers it, a private interior driveway,” Kampus said of Pool Road. “It is located 100% within property owned by the United States government. While I agree with Matt [Sawicki] that the BRA is putting sewer under that area, it is on private property; the BRA is paying for that. It is not part of the town sewer system. The town sewer system is exclusively on Scenic Highway; that is where we will be connecting to the town sewer. That is where the frontage is.”

Citing the state legislature’s definition of frontage for sewer purposes, Kampas said that Scenic Highway should be used since it is a “way on which the sewer is constructed. And by that they mean the town sewer...They intend to mean a way…where you are going to connect to your site.”

She also said that, if the frontage were to be agreed upon, the decision of the sewer commissioners would not change how development fees are calculated. It would remain based on frontage and lot size.

As highlighted by Sawicki earlier, Kampas also noted the discrepancy regarding whether the connection fee is commercial or residential.

As stated in the town’s sewer regulations, “applicants must pay a one-time connection fee to tap into the Town’s sanitary sewer systems.” The residential fee is the sum of the “base fee plus an additional fee per sewer unit,” which in this context would be $100 per unit multiplied by the 91 campsites. The commercial fee would be the sum of the “base fee plus an additional fee per square foot of building floor space.”

“It was corrected to residential units,” Sewer Commission chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian said of the changes. “Does anyone else’s memory serve me correctly?”

“It was my understanding that the number of campsites would be the number of units that we would be charging for the user fee and for the units,” Sewer Commission member Mary Jane Mastrangelo said. “So under that fee, it is $91,000 because it’s 91 users being added to the system…Whether it’s seasonal or not, we have to have that allocation for them all year long.”

Mastrangelo said that while she would not support changing the residential users, she would be in favor of amending the frontage to Scenic Highway. The rest of the Sewer Commission agreed.

“First of all, thank you. I’m sure you’re getting weary of us. This is, I think, our third meeting. Four of our five members are here…it just shows how important that is to us that our entire board has basically been coming to these meetings,” Recreation Authority chairman Gregory A. Folino said.

“A compromise is something when we came in…whenever it was at the very beginning of time; we knew that fee was there and we did ask that question—Pool Road was always concerning; how did that calculation come up and that’s where we are today. I think I speak for the board that any relief that you can provide for us is appreciated,” he said. “Thank you.”

The board unanimously voted to amend the sewer system development charge for the Bourne Recreation Authority property to $195,900, calculated as “$75 per foot at 105 feet of frontage, plus $11,500 at 16.35 acres.”
