Title: Bourne Police Station Roof Building Committee Appoints New Members
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-15T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-police-station-roof-building-committee-appoints-new-members/article_a0b10dd8-a05e-41ff-9124-422529320363.html

Two of the three specialized seats on the Police Station Roof Building Committee have been filled. The seats had previously been vacant, resulting in the Select Board temporarily seating the committee, with the intention of pursuing filling the three seats with interested applicants. The matter was discussed during a Select Board meeting held on Tuesday , May 12 .

Michael Alexander and Robert Schofield were appointed to the committee, joining Finance Committee member Thomas Joyce, Capital Outlay Committee at-large member Bruce R. McNamee and Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo, who have each been appointed to serve as representatives of their respective groups on the committee. They will all serve on the committee alongside Police Chief Brandon M. Esip.

Prior to these new appointments, the Select Board had been temporarily serving on the committee due to the committee not having enough members. On April 14, the board voted 4-1-0, with Mastrangelo the sole dissenting vote, to have the board serve on the Police Station Roof Building Committee in the interim until the specialized seats were filled.

At its meeting on Tuesday , May 12 , the Select Board voted to rescind the aforementioned vote from April, as it was no longer necessary, as it had approved appointing Alexander and Schofield to the committee.

Alexander will serve as the committee’s member with engineering and design experience, and Schofield as the committee’s member with building experience. There remains a vacant seat for a member with experience in legal and construction contracts.

The Select Board also voted to instruct the committee to proceed with its work as charged, with the vacancy.

Built in 2019, the new police station had a list of defects in its short lifetime: leaks, improper ventilation, and failing plumbing, among others. The town has since sued both M. O’Connor Inc., the contractor, and Kaestle Boos Associates, the architect, who were given charge of the project, for damages; the suit is still ongoing. At Special Town Meeting in October, residents voted in favor of fixing the leaking roof now rather than later, given concerns that those issues would worsen in the intervening years before an eventual settlement.

The Select Board had formed the Police Station Roof Building Committee to oversee the project, as the committee is appointed by and reports to the Select Board.

The committee’s charge reads that it “is to make recommendations to the Select Board and Town Meeting regarding the design, demolition and reconstruction of the roof at the Bourne Police Station.”

To conduct its charge, the committee members are tasked with a variety of responsibilities.

These responsibilities include serving as the design selection committee in recommending an owner’s project manager and architect to be hired; review studies and documents, be aware of the needs of the facility and department and recommend proposed roof designs; provide timelines and plans to Town Meeting and the Select Board; provide the Select Board with a report about the committee’s and project’s activities, progress and sequencing; sharing a report with the Select Board at least every six months until the project’s completion; and overseeing all other related work.
