Title: Bourne DNR Requests Annual Funding For Ramp, Pier, Dredging Projects
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-01-30T00:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-dnr-requests-annual-funding-for-ramp-pier-dredging-projects/article_eaf5ed6c-a6b4-49e0-9933-6ab6161ae849.html

The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and Storm Harbor Committee presented to the Bourne Select Board an annual request of $250,000 to fund the capital project of dredging, ramp and pier repair and maintenance.

DNR Director Hannah Lawrence said that dredging projects occur when permitting allows and should be done annually. This depends on the project’s scope and permitting stage.

“Dredging is a major part of the town’s harbor management plan,” Lawrence said. “During years when there’s a lengthy permitting process, the town should continue to maintain and repair the town’s public access ramps and piers.”

Since funds for the repairs of the aforementioned are not allocated to any department’s annual budget, some facilities are in a state of disrepair.

“By combining the maintenance of ramps and piers with dredging, funds are designated on an annual basis to address these needs,” she said.

“We are currently working on a project at Hen Cove, and there are a couple of other projects that are identified by the committee that need to be completed, such as dredging at Taylor Point, as well as repairs at the Barlows Landing ramp,” Lawrence said.

Select Board member Anne-Marie Siroonian asked where the sand is going from all the dredging projects.

Lawrence said that regarding the ongoing project at Hen Cove, steps have been taken to have the sand trucked off-site and disposed of.

Siroonian asked if anyone was buying the sand and if that is included in all future dredging.

“It depends on what the project is and the location as far as what the disposal ends up being,” Lawrence said. “But for this particular project at Hen Cove that’s ongoing, that’ll be trucked off-site.”

Town engineer Timothy Lydon said that the sand at Hen Cove, which is part of the Hen Cove Boat Ramp reconstruction, will not stay there for long.

Time of year restrictions prohibit dredging between January 15 and July 30 to protect winter flounder. Additional dredging was required, so the town received an incursion into the restriction by the Department of Environmental Protection, allowing for the dredging to be completed between Tuesday , January 27 , and today , January 30 .

The sand will be analyzed before being removed, and then the town will “remediate the storage area back into its previous condition,” he said. “The contractor will begin trucking soil from the site directly to the ISWM facility in the next day or so.”

After the dredging phase is complete, the town is preparing for the “delivery of the precast concrete planks so the construction of the ramp can begin. This is anticipated to take place during the month of March,” he said. “With paving waiting until nicer weather in April,” Lydon said that the estimated project completion date would be Friday, May 1.

Lydon added, “We are all within our permitted activities and are committed to remaining that way.”
