Title: Bourne Bike, Pedestrian Committee Updates Select Board
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-06-12T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-bike-pedestrian-committee-updates-select-board/article_239ed32b-feea-4795-9863-487c3aed9c9a.html

The Town Administrator’s Advisory Committee on Pedestrian Bicycle Pathway shared an update on the future of both the rail trail project and it as a committee at the Select Board’s meeting on Tuesday , June 9 .

Committee interim chairman Kenneth A. Cheitlin reported out from the committee’s discussions since the last time it appeared before the board in February.

Cheitlin first noted that, despite ongoing efforts to have Governor Maura T. Healey greenlight the process of removing the Falmouth secondary (F2) rail line, the plan has not yet come to fruition.

He said that, in the meantime, the committee has continued with the rail-with-trail concept, meaning the trail would run along the tracks, for phase one, which would be the first half-mile of the proposed bike path.

The committee had been charged with advising the town administrator on the construction of a bike and pedestrian pathway proposed to be built along the F2 rail line as part of a 6.2-mile rail-with-trail project attempting to link with the Shining Sea Bike Path and head toward the Cape Cod Canal Bike Path. The cost for phase 1 of the project totals at $10.2 million.

The design for the Bourne Rail Trail was broken down into a four-phase approach: phase 1 goes from Bell Road to Monument Neck Road; phase two would stretch south from Monument Neck Road to Monks Cove in Pocasset; phase 3 would extend from Monks Park to the Shore Road overpass bridge on Shipyard Lane by Kingman Yacht Center; and phase 4 would run from Shipyard Lane to the Falmouth town line.

Cheitlin explained that an obstacle that the committee is facing in regard to Phase One is the delay in the bidding of Phase One after Gray Gables residents expressed their disagreement with the potential of disturbances to existing amenities, increased traffic and to design changes by the Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT), which proposed a terminus in Stackpole Park.

In August 2025, the committee voted 4-1 to recommend to Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem to delay the bidding of the first phase. Cheitlin added that, in addition to the delay, Phase One is “no longer on the [Transportation Improvement Plan].”

The Massachusetts Transportation Improvement Plan (TIP) is a capital program that lists all federally funded surface transportation projects that are scheduled to be constructed in the state.

With the project at a sort of impasse, the committee has been discussing what the next step is. Cheitlin noted that “MassDOT is clearly waiting to see what the town’s inclination is…on Phase One.”

Cheitlin said that the committee was currently split on how it should approach Phase One. At a committee meeting on June 4, committee members Mary Jane Mastrangelo, the Select Board representative on the committee, and Barbara O’Donnell were in support of recommencing communications with MassDOT to resolve the issues the residents had with its design. Committee member Matthew Silvia said he was supportive of continuing the conversation as he did not see the harm in doing so. In contrast, Cheitlin stated that he was not in agreement with this suggestion primarily due to the additional time and money it would accrue to do so.

“I don’t really have a recommendation from the committee because the committee was split on it, but I do think it’s important for the Select Board to make some decision about whether or not we want to continue to spend money on Phase One or not,” Cheitlin stated.

“I think that it’s fair to say there’s a firm conviction, on the part of everyone involved in a significant way in this project, that the path–the entire path–cannot be built rail-with-trail,” Cheitlin said. He explained that although Phases One and Two designs could be done as a rail-with-trial, Phases Three and Four cannot be.

Cheitlin shared that Phases Two, Three and Four are still on the TIP under a section for potential future projects. “The committee didn’t see any reason, necessarily, to take Phase Two off that, although there wasn’t a lot of enthusiasm for spending town money to design Phase Two right now,” he said, adding that in regards to the third and fourth phases, “the committee was crystal clear that those will never be built rail-with-trail, and that we should, if the Select Board is inclined, we should request that 3 and 4 come off the TIP and discontinue any further work for that.”

He noted that potential eminent domain issues required fencing between the trail and the rail would separate the town, and the construction of 11 new bridges would make it so that the project “simply wouldn’t be the end project I think that people envisioned.”

Cheitlin outlined how the option of removing the track, for a rail-to-trail project, is met by opposition from various entities.

The commonwealth states it is still an active track. Cheitlin said that meeting that requirement is “pretty easy to meet,” noting that the track is only being used seasonally for a dinner train and approximately once a week by Cavossa Disposal, a private operator, to move construction debris off-Cape.

Cavossa Disposal uses the track and opposes removing it, as Cheitlin stated that Cavossa Disposal said that if the train is removed, it will have to utilize trucks, which would “increase…truck burden on the streets.” Cheitlin says, “It’s not an increase in truck traffic that would be noticed at all.”

Cheitlin explained that other Upper Cape towns have suggested the track should remain due to the hypothetical need for having the option to haul trash off-Cape via trains.

In more recent discussions with the US military, officials have told Cheitlin that the tracks near Joint Base Cape Cod are needed as part of the Strategic Rail Corridor Network (STRACNET), a defense strategy which requires that requires the military to have access to a track to a port. However, Cheitlin added that the military does have plans to improve the rail network.

Cheitlin explained that at its meeting on June 4, the committee acknowledged existing discussions about a new track being built “off the canal line.” He added that “it would be a straight shot inland, away from the sensitive coastline,…shorter, straighter, not speed restricted” and “could go either to the Bourne [Integrated Solid Waste Management] facility or the edge of the base.”

“It seems to us that if that’s something that people are interested in, and freely admit that there’s a difference in opinion about whether any track is needed, but if that Upper Cape towns, the military and everyone else thinks the track is necessary, this is the perfect time for that to be considered,” Cheitlin stated, noting other large regional infrastructure projects, such as the Bourne and Sagamore bridges.

He noted that if the Select Board were interested in this idea, he would recommend that the board facilitate a meeting with Lieutenant Governor Kim Driscoll and Interim Secretary of Transportation Phillip Eng.

Pivoting away from the discussion of projects, Cheitlin took a moment to discuss the administrative matter of the committee’s charge and who it reports to.

“We think that it would be good for the town to have a town-level policy advisory committee that reports to the Select Board,” Cheitlin said, conveying the committee’s unanimous perspective, adding that broadening the charge would allow the committee to be able to advise on all other bicycle and pedestrian matters in town, in addition to the rail trail project.

Technically a seven-member committee, it only has four members: Cheitlin, Silvia, O’Donnell and Select Board representative Mastrangelo. Cheitlin noted that the School Committee-designated seat is currently vacant. At its meeting on June 4, members agreed that it is important to fill those remaining seats.

“A reorganized charter for our committee would allow us to take a more holistic view of bicycle and pedestrian topics in the town,” Silvia stated. “But particularly if it looks like it’s going to be a slow roll to figure out the connection between the canal and the Shining Sea Bike Path, that we make some strategic decisions, particularly about modern rail east of MacArthur [Boulevard], and removing phases 3 and 4 from TOP consideration, to concentrate on focusing on the important things that we could potentially bring to bear for the town.”

Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti stated that the board will have to think, research and debate about the various items that Cheitlin presented during his update.
