Title: Bourne Commission On Disabilities Approves Funds For Basketball Court Accessibility
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-10T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-commission-on-disabilities-approves-funds-for-basketball-court-accessibility/article_4846ff24-0af6-423c-ba68-15e348c255c2.html

At its meeting on June 30, the Bourne Commission on Disabilities voted to approve the Bourne Recreation Committee’s request for funds to provide accessibility to the recreation area behind the Bourne Veteran’s Memorial Community Center.

On behalf of the Recreation Committee, chairman Roger J. Mailini had written to Commission on Disabilities chairman Marc Brunco to request the use of Community Preservation Committee funds, which had been allocated in the 2018 ADA requirements and improvements fund.

Estimating the cost of work to construct accessible pathways to the Jason Comoletti Basketball Court at $35,000, the Recreation Committee had voted in support of requesting that amount from the aforementioned fund, Brunco shared with the commission. The balance of the fund was at $68,296.06.

Commission vice chairwoman Lori E. Cooney stated her concern with the large monetary request, citing how other town boards, committees and departments have also expressed their interest in receiving monies from that fund. She also wanted to hear from the CPC whether it felt that the Recreation Committee’s request was appropriate.

“Of the $68,000, has any of that already been earmarked for any other projects?” commission member Jonathan Greenwood asked.

Cooney listed ADA improvements to Taylor’s Point Marina, picnic table installations, and ramps for the library’s fire exit as projects that would be partially supported by the fund.

However, Cooney noted that the money for those projects “is not spent,” which led her to ask if the requesting process for funds should be “first come, first served.”

Leading off that suggestion, Greenwood proposed that the commission establish a 30-day timeframe whereby groups who are requesting money from that fund provide quotes on the cost of their proposed projects.

Greenwood and Cooney both emphasized the importance of having cost estimates so the commission can accurately keep tabs on the fund’s balance.

If the commission were to approve the Recreation Committee’s request, the fund’s balance would sit at approximately $33,000, Cooney noted. She then asked Brunco his thoughts. As chairman, Brunco wanted to limit “suggestions of courses of action”; however, he noted that there were “good arguments on both sides.”

Cooney felt that since the money had been in the fund for eight years, she was open to persuasion to approve the request. She also agreed with Greenwood’s suggestion of implementing a timeframe for the commission to be informed of the estimated costs of projects for which fund monies were being requested.

Reiterating Cooney’s point that the money has been in the fund for eight years, Greenwood stated his support for approving the request.

“It’s intended to go to good use. I would feel comfortable allocating it to the accessibility of the basketball court,” he said. “We may want to think about a call-out to whoever else had their eye or asked about the funding with a correspondence that says ‘We need to hear from you with a good faith estimate within the next 30 days if you are still interested.’”

If the commission were to approve the Recreation Committee’s request, then “at least it would be a finished project,” Cooney said of the basketball court. Next steps would then be to figure out how to allocate the remaining balance in the fund. “I think I am comfortable with that if you all are,” she added.

The commission unanimously approved a motion made by Greenwood and seconded by commission member Nathan Carr to approve the Recreation Committee’s request.

Brunco informed the commission that he would contact Bourne Recreation Director Katie Matthews with the news as soon as he is able to.
