Title: Bourne Select Board Authorizes Contract Negotiations With Pomroy Associates For Library Building
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-08T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-select-board-authorizes-contract-negotiations-with-pomroy-associates-for-library-building/article_64c18065-38b7-4cda-b6d6-08d11b28839b.html

The Bourne Select Board authorized Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem to negotiate the fee and enter into a contract with Pomroy Associates as the Owner’s Project Manager (OPM) to oversee the development of Bourne’s new library at its meeting on Monday , May 4 .

The unanimous vote occurred after the Library Building Committee’s decision to recommend Pomroy Associates as OPM to the Select Board. Library Building Committee chairwoman Irja Finn told the board that the decision was reached after the committee interviewed the top four remaining firms for that role on April 30.

Select Board member Peter J. Meier inquired about the reasons why Pomroy Associates was hired, noting that the firm also serves as OPM on the south side fire station and the ISWM transfer station. He specifically asked about the building committee’s opinion on that matter.

It was a concern that was addressed by the building committee during the interview on April 30, said Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian, who serves as the board’s representative on the committee.

Siroonian explained that committee members had individually reviewed all six firms’ proposals and used a scoring rubric based on the state’s Designer Selection Law to grade each firm. These scores were then used by McCollem to create a composite score for each firm.

Pomroy Associates received the highest score. CHA Consulting, P-Three Inc., and Accenture were ranked second, third, and fourth, respectively, with only a few points separating the three. Placing fifth and sixth, Colliers Engineering & Design and M&J Engineering were not included in further deliberations.

Following the interviews with the top four firms on April 30, “Pomroy still came out on top as first choice,” Siroonian stated.

In response to Meier’s question, she stated that the three projects—south side fire station, the ISWM transfer station and the library, for which Pomroy Associates is the OPM—all have different project leads. Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo commented that this answered a question she was going to ask.

Siroonian noted that Richard Pomroy, the firm’s principal, and Taylor MacDonald, the firm’s partner, will “be involved, but our go-to and our point person, project manager at the library is different,” referring to Alex Murphy of Pomroy Associates.

The firm shared multiple times at the interview that it does “not take on any other projects that are conflicting with where they’re at in their OPM projects,” Siroonian said. “They are very diligent with their time and attention to each project, and they won’t take it on unless they can give 100% to the project.”

Finn reiterated Siroonian’s comments and added that Murphy has specific experience overseeing library projects, most recently the Swansea Free Public Library.

Prefacing that he has “the world of respect” for Richard Pomroy, who has “done great work,” Meier stated that he wanted “to make sure that the question was asked.”
