Title: Bourne FinCom, Select Board Discuss Town Meeting Roles, Responsibilties
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-02-06T00:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-fincom-select-board-discuss-town-meeting-roles-responsibilties/article_f5fdc5d7-6404-49a9-859e-d00c9c95de4c.html

On Monday, February 2, the Select Board and Finance Committee held a joint meeting to discuss the roles and responsibilities of the annual Town Meeting, specifically clarifying which group will make motions and provide verbal explanations.

The topic was brought to the attention of Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem by several Select Board members, McCollem said, adding it may be time for a reevaluation of the roles.

McCollem said that a couple of years ago, the Finance Committee had asked the Select Board to make the motions and give verbal explanations at Town Meeting, in addition to the existing responsibilities for setting the warrant and implementing actions.

“It is beginning to feel like…it’s a very closed system,” she said, “We’re not checking and balancing each other.”

Select Board member Jeanne L. Azarovitz, referencing classes she had taken at Massachusetts Maritime Academy regarding Town Meeting and procedure after she was elected to the board, said she became concerned that there was a conflict of interest for the Select Board to be responsible for the motions and verbal explanations.

During the previous charter review, the topic was raised as well, Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian said, adding that the Charter Review Committee had sought to keep the charter’s “language and statutory responsibilities intact, being that the Finance Committee is the fiscal watchdog…It’s critical that they present to Town Meeting a very detailed report on those finances…to the legislative body, which in our case is Town Meeting floor.”

Providing a historical perspective on how the additional roles were added to the board’s Town Meeting responsibilities, Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo said that when the topic was discussed at a meeting with the Finance Committee and the Select Board, the majority of the board did not agree with the committee. She said that after the meeting with the board, the committee had a discussion amongst themselves.

It was after this, Mastrangelo said, that the Finance Committee told the Select Board that they “didn’t want to make the motions and do the verbal comments anymore.” They just wanted to give their recommendations because that’s all that was required by the charter,” she said.

Select Board member Peter J. Meier said it would be best if the Finance Committee returned to making motions and the first recommendation.

“For me, it’s really about checks and balances,” Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti said. “If it’s more transparent and it should be done by the Finance Committee, I agree.”

Finance Committee vice chairwoman Amanda Bongiovanni began the committee’s comments, recalling that the committee took a vote to no longer be responsible for making motions and giving verbal explanations after there was a reluctance by the Select Board to have a joint meeting about it. However, she concluded that she did not want to reexamine the past, but rather to prioritize the current decision.

“I do think it’s really an administrative task, and I don’t think it necessarily exclusively should belong to the Finance Committee. We’re advising with our vote whether we read a motion and or an article and comments doesn’t define our role,” Bongiovanni said. “I view our meetings where we’re diving into the details and asking questions and then ultimately deciding as a committee, a watchdog task, and part of our role.”

She continued, saying that having the Select Board be responsible for the motions and verbal explanations “made sense…since you’re the ones proposing and sponsoring the majority of the articles,” noting that the Planning Board also sponsors articles and makes motions.

“The administrative part, Erica [Flemming], town counsel, and I, we do draft [the motions], but finalizing those motions and actually communicating that to Town Meeting is not administrative. That’s advocating, and that’s advising the townspeople on what you see as the action to be taken,” McCollem said.

Bongiovanni said that the Finance Committee’s vote indicates whether it recommends approval, disapproval, or postponement.

“I understand what you’re saying, but I don’t agree that reading the motion makes it our advisement,” she said. “If we don’t have a positive recommendation…we wouldn’t read the motion anyway… Our vote is advising how we’re advising Town Meeting.”

“The language in the charter clearly states that the Finance Committee has to create a very detailed report, written, has to include the fiscal and tax implications and on operating budget, a statement outlining support or opposition as well as the vote to Town Meeting,” Siroonian said. “That’s a statutory authority of the Finance Committee as a fiscal watchdog.”

In response, Bongiovanni said that the report is included in the Voter’s Handbook and also features the committee’s votes on the articles, which she described as “separate and distinct from reading the motions and the explanations.”

Mastrangelo said that the topic at hand lies in the making of the motion.

“What the moderator says is that you have a positive motion on article one and that positive motion is the recommendation. And so when the Finance Committee was making the motion, then if the Finance Committee had a positive motion, it was clear that the Finance Committee was supporting,” she said. “If the Select Board didn’t support it…you don’t have a positive motion, the motion goes to the floor [for] someone else to make it…I think this is a good discussion.”

In regards to the verbal explanations, Mastrangelo understood that the process to write those is difficult, especially for the Select Board due to certain constraints, one being that the board “does not have the same access to department heads that the Finance Committee does because the Select Board can’t interfere with the day-to-day operations,” adding that currently the town administrator solely facilitates the board’s correspondence with the department heads. However, she also acknowledged that the Finance Committee only has five members out of the nine possible seats.

“My concern would be if we’re writing the pros and cons of something, that’s really outside of what we should be doing, in my opinion,” Finance Committee member Arthur Wayne Sampson said. “We’re kind of limited in what we receive here.”

Finance Committee chairman James D. Sullivan said that when the committee was responsible for the explanations, he “[didn’t] think it was so great, because we don’t have the expertise,” proposing that if hypothetically the committee were to provide basic remarks, perhaps town staff could provide in-depth explanations if it would be applicable in certain situations.

In agreement with Bongiovanni, Finance Committee member Carla Emmons said it is an administrative task and that the committee’s vote reflects its opinion of an article.“After we say, ‘Do you have a motion? Yes, we have a motion.’ We approve. And then maybe a few comments on why we approved it or did not approve it, but not anything as detailed as the responses that are given when they say, ‘Oh, you have the floor,’ because those are very elaborate...very time-consuming,” she said. “So, I can understand trying to share the burden, but again, we have five members that are not experts in any of those fields.”

Azarovitz responded by reiterating the need for checks and balances at Town Meeting, including the Finance Committee making the motion into the record. Mastrangelo said, “I think that logistically for Town Meeting, whoever makes the motion has to have the floor on the motion and do the explanation,” and that there has been an “effort in recent years to have staff identified…to answer questions,” concluding by saying she “understands both sides of the issue.”

Finance Committee member Thomas Joyce referenced the state’s handbook regarding finance committees, in which it is written that the finance committees own the budget. Bongiovanni clarified that while other towns’ finance committees own the budget, the Town of Bourne’s charter states that the Select Board owns the budget at Town Meeting.

“I recall the discussion a couple of years ago when we went through this, discussing whether or not we should have town employees help us answer the questions,” Joyce said. “We’re just not qualified to answer questions sometimes.”

“We aren’t either; we often defer questions” to town staff, Siroonian said. If the Select Board happens to know the answer, “we certainly would step up and give further explanation or answer questions.”

While she acknowledged the committee’s report, Siroonian asked who is watching the board at Town Meetings since they currently present, explain and recommend articles, suggesting that the Finance Committee is responsible for acting as a fiscal watchdog at the meeting.

Bongiovanni reiterated that the committee’s vote to recommend an article for approval to Town Meeting serves as a check and balance, to which Azarovitz responded, saying that making a motion is a check and balance outlined in the town’s charter, and “if the Select Board is doing everything, that is where we lose the check and balance.”

Azarovitz reiterated other Select Board members’ comments, stating that the board can provide support for the short-staffed Finance Committee at Town Meeting. She reiterated that having the board sponsor and make the motion in addition to verbally explaining it would be “too much.”

Before the joint meeting was adjourned, Sullivan concluded the discussion, saying that it will be an agenda item most likely at the next meeting to create a plan.

At a Select Board meeting on Tuesday, February 3, the board followed up on the discussion among themselves from the night before. Azarovitz suggested that “perhaps we should consider having town counsel weigh in and just make sure there’s no conflict with the charter.”

Ferretti said, “That’s a good idea. Maybe see what his thoughts are on that” and to ask, “How does he perceive the charter versus administrative duty versus Select Board versus FinCom duties.”
