Title: Bourne FinCom To Wait For Town Counsel's Opinion
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-02-13T00:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-fincom-to-wait-for-town-counsels-opinion/article_643f69b0-4b58-4955-811b-2938fe2916e7.html

After having a joint meeting with the Select Board on February 2 regarding the roles and responsibilities of the groups at Town Meeting, the Finance Committee had a debrief on the matter on Monday , February 9 .

Finance Committee vice chairwoman Amanda Bongiovanni recommended that the committee also wait to discuss the topic further until Town Counsel Bryan Bertram shares his opinion.

Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem requested Bertram’s opinion regarding the role of the Select Board and Finance Committee in presenting and providing information at Town Meeting after Select Board clerk Jeanne L. Azarovitz suggested getting town counsel’s opinion on the matter at a Select Board meeting on February 3. As of Tuesday , February 10, McCollem had not received an opinion, but said she will share it with the Finance Committee and Select Board as soon as she does.

Committee chairman James D. Sullivan asked if there was any further discussion before Renee Gratis, who had served as Finance Committee chairwoman when the change was implemented, made her comments.

Having watched the February 2 meeting, Gratis said, the Finance Committee had done a “great job explaining the reasoning and the thought process behind making the decision.” She continued, recollecting that when she became chairwoman and experienced “culture shock of everything that the Finance Committee was doing,” and decided to look at the committee’s role as described in the charter.

After reviewing the charter, Gratis “felt that we were really doing a bulk of work that a volunteer committee really shouldn’t be doing,” so she scaled down the financial report and reexamined the role the committee plays at Town Meetings in presenting articles, as she said, “It seems like the Select Board should be taking ownership of their warrant.”

“Our job, really, as a volunteer committee is just to give our opinion,” Gratis said. “I don’t know how it evolved over time to be anything more than that. I don’t know the full history of it. We do our checks and balances. We do write our report. We do make our recommendation. But this whole presenting articles at Town Meeting, it really just didn’t seem like it was supposed to be our role to be explaining everything in depth the way that we were.” After having meetings on the topic, Gratis said, it was “agreed to do the change.”

Regarding the joint meeting last week, Gratis said the reasons the Select Board had for the board to no longer make the motions and verbal explanation were “pretty much the same” as the reasons the Finance Committee had.

“I think that instead of passing the buck back and forth... It really needs to be what the Finance Committee believes their role at Town Meetings should be,” Gratis said. “Do you believe that you should be up there explaining what articles mean to the town voters? Or do you believe that you should be up there giving your opinion?”

“The good thing about having open discussion is you’re getting everyone’s opinion. You’re getting everybody’s feedback,” she said. “You just got to think about what the role should be, not what it used to be.”

Public comment continued as John York, a resident of Cataumet, said, “We do need to think about the past…I think the reason traditionally that the Finance Committee made the recommendations is that it was really their task as a committee of the Town Meeting…to report back to Town Meeting with a budget and recommendations.”

He said he was “disturbed to see Select Board or somebody who’s not a function of Town Meeting making those recommendations to use as Town Meeting voters.” He also suggested that town counsel clarify who the Finance Committee is a committee of and who it reports to.

“Either way we give our recommendations to the Town Meeting,” Sullivan said before asking McCollem a clarifying question. “Someone from the Select Board said that we as Finance Committee members had more access to town staff…If we want more information from anyone in town… we should go through you, right?”

“You don’t have to. The Select Board does…I’m happy to help coordinate for the Finance Committee,” McCollem said. “The charter is very clear that the Select Board cannot work directly with the staff. The Select Board has to work through me.” She said the Finance Committee can speak with staff.

Finance Committee member Thomas Joyce asked, “Can we call them as a committee or as an individual?”

“If you are acting as a committee, it needs to be a meeting,” McCollem said. But if a committee member were to go individually to a town staff member, she recommended that “If you speak among [yourselves] and there are questions that…the committee wants…you to investigate on the article that you’re working on, then you can say ‘I’m the Finance Committee person who’s working on this article. Can you answer these questions for me or can you help me understand this.’”

Sullivan asked if there was any more discussion, to which Bongiovanni replied, “No, I’d like to hear from town counsel and then, depending on what he says, maybe we can have another workshop meeting about it.”
