Title: Bourne Sewer Commissioners Continue To Discuss Intermunicipal Agreement
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-06-26T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-sewer-commissioners-continue-to-discuss-intermunicipal-agreement/article_9f46d565-29b0-4792-907d-86d4536cbdb9.html

The Board of Sewer Commissioners continued its discussion on Tuesday , June 23, about the intermunicipal agreement (IMA) between the Town of Bourne and the Town of Wareham for the transfer of Bourne’s flow to Wareham’s wastewater treatment facility. At its last meeting on May 26 , the board had agreed to examine and review the IMA to gain a better understanding of its details.

The agreement was in effect as of February 23, 2010, board clerk Mary Jane Mastrangelo noted, adding that it was around this time that the Town of Wareham inquired to the Massachusetts Department of Revenue to “look at their finances” and make “recommendations.”

Mastrangelo continued, stating that circa 2014 and 2015, the Town of Bourne had concerns regarding the billing it was receiving from the Town of Wareham for transferring flow, which resulted in the Town Meeting appropriating funds to conduct an audit.

This produced a settlement agreement between the two towns, she said. Noting that one of the terms of the agreement stipulated that the towns should meet for a five-year review of the agreement, Mastrangelo said that although the towns did meet, a final review was not held.

As the 20-year agreement nears its end in February 2030, Mastrangelo noted that it may be time to begin conversations with Wareham about renewing the agreement since that is less than four years away.

“It’s important for us to continue to figure out how we’re going to work with Wareham, to have some strategic thought about: what are they doing with their plan, how could it help us in our wastewater planning,” Mastrangelo said. “I think it has to be on our radar because you don’t want to wait til the last minute for renewing the 20-year agreement.”

Chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian said that having a conversation or joint meeting with the Town of Wareham is important as it would allow both towns to share their concerns, future wastewater management plans, as well as discuss the IMA’s language in regard to how state subsidies would be applied to Bourne’s bill from Wareham, specifically articles 5.1 and 5.5.

Article 5.1 reads that “Bourne shall pay Wareham a proportionate share for Wareham’s works described but not limited capital investment in various common sewage hereinafter in Paragraphs 5.2 and 5.3, including, to, costs, such as easements, land takings, engineering, legal, administrative, interest, bond other costs incurred or incidental to the projects, amount of all grants made to Wareham by State construction, fees, and all less the full and Federal agencies.”

Article 5.5 states that “In the event Wareham undertakes major repairs, replacement, or improvements to the common sewage works, or is directed or ordered to provide higher degree of treatment in the future, then, the capital cost, less any State and/or Federal grant(s), related thereto shall be apportioned between the parties on the basis of 82.09%, representing Wareham’s share, and 17.91%, representing Bourne’s share.”

Having interpreted the language to mean that Bourne is responsible to pay its proportional share, which is 17.9%, of Wareham’s capital costs after state and federal grants have been deducted from the bill, Siroonian suggested asking at the proposed joint meeting between the two towns if “that language is sufficient enough” to determine how the Cape Cod and Island Water Protection Fund (CCIWPF) subsidy would be applied to the bill.

Through the CCIWPF, the Town of Bourne can apply a 25% subsidy to what it owes the Town of Wareham for the costs of Wareham’s wastewater treatment facility project. Operated within the state’s Clean Water Trust, the fund aims to support the region in financing water-quality remediation and wastewater infrastructure projects.

After proposing a joint meeting with Wareham in the fall, Siroonian inquired what the other sewer commissioners thought.

Meier stated that it would be important for the board to discuss what topics should be included in its conversation with their counterparts in Wareham. Board member Jeanne L. Azarovitz agreed.

“We could have a workshop on this alone,” Meier added.

Mastrangelo noted that in regard to the joint meeting, the Bourne Board of Sewer Commissioners should be present with both the Wareham Select Board and Sewer Commissioners.

She added that the discussion regarding the financial aspect of the agreement will be “complex,” suggesting that the board potentially obtain a consultant to assist, similarly to when the last agreement was written.

When Siroonian inquired what kind of consultant she was suggesting, Mastrangelo said a firm that is “knowledgeable about intermunicipal agreements.” Public Works Director Matthew Sawicki said that he would research financial firms that specialize in rate studies.

“I think we have to make sure that we carefully think out what our goals and objectives are with the [intermunicipal] agreement,” Mastrangelo said, agreeing with continuing to discuss the matter as a board and having a joint meeting with Wareham in the fall to “make sure we have it before the December funding system for the Clean Water Trust.”

“I just think the earlier we start meeting with Wareham, I think the better,” Sawicki said, adding that a joint meeting in the fall “would be key” and suggested that the two towns meet on the matter every six months until the new agreement is finalized to exchange ideas.

The three to four years until the current agreement ends will “fly by,” he added. “I just don’t want to see us scrambling at the end where there is an opportunity to kind of start now.”

Siroonian proposed that the board have a “robust conversation” about the IMA at its August meeting.

Meier asked Sawicki how working with Wareham Sewer Department Director Scott Kraihanzel has been. Corresponding “every couple of weeks” about the facility’s operation and about “how things are going on his side,” Sawicki said working with Kraihanzel has “worked really well.”

“There’s definitely a path to coming up with a really good IMA,” he added.
