Title: Bourne Historical Commission Discusses Demolitions In Historic Taylor's Point
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-17T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-historical-commission-discusses-demolitions-in-historic-taylors-point/article_a19a01da-369a-4c04-9df9-e774df96839f.html

The development of the Massachusetts Maritime Academy’s (MMA) campus on Taylor’s Point in Buzzards Bay was a point of discussion at the Bourne Historical Commission’s meeting on Tuesday , July 14 , as members emphasized the historic and economic importance of the neighborhood.

Commission member Jack MacDonald had requested that the commission have a conversation about the demolition of 14 Taylor Road; town records show it was built in 1875. The property is now owned by MMA.

“State-owned property does not come before us,” commission secretary Deborah M. Burgess stated in regard to the commission’s jurisdiction to hold demolition delay hearings for buildings more than 75 years old.

In response to Burgess’ inquiry as to whether it has been demolished yet, commission chairman Neil F. Langille said, “No, it’s getting close. There’s a chain-link fence around it.”

Citing the expansion of the MMA campus into the residential neighborhood in Taylor’s Point, Langille stated that although “I don’t know what’s going to happen, it needs to be fought by the town, because you’re going to lose a significant amount of tax base...as well as history.”

“The history is practically gone out there,” Burgess said, noting the changes to the area as she shared how her grandmother described playing golf and tennis on Taylor’s Point in her diary.

The demolition of 14 Taylor Road will be the demolition of the “fourth historic house in that neighborhood,” MacDonald said. Noting that “it goes beyond Taylor’s Point,” he recalled how “the second oldest house in Buzzards Bay” was torn down as well.

“We had no say in it,” he added. “But we can talk about this here and recognize it.”

MacDonald noted that there is no opportunity to “salvage” potentially historical items from the aforementioned demolitions.

Langille suggested that the commission emphasize to the town the financial impact of the “loss of the town tax revenue,” as he noted there are “approximately 100 homes in that area.”

“This is a historic area,” Langille stated, with other commission members in agreement and recalling various historic and socially significant homes and establishments. “A large area of cottages that working men and women, families, brought up during the times when the Taylor family left the place and sold.”

General Charles Henry Taylor, a Civil War veteran of the Union Army who served as the longtime publisher of The Boston Globe and in the Massachusetts House of Representatives, had owned a large estate in that area, hence the name Taylor’s Point.

“It’s a way of life for these people and there are a lot of these people still here,” he continued. “A lot of descendants are people who originally bought the cottages.”

“It’s still a prime historic area for the town,” Langille stated.
