Title: Bourne Historical Commission Welcomes New Member
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-17T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-historical-commission-welcomes-new-member/article_55a85420-cb7e-4db5-872b-d3be07f99b29.html

The Bourne Historical Commission welcomed a new member, appointed officers and named representatives at its meeting on Tuesday , July 14 .

Treather Gassmann, a resident of Monument Beach, officially joined the commission on Tuesday as an associate member.

Her love for history, particularly oral history, and historical buildings, such as the Jonathan Bourne Historical Center, powered her interest in joining the board. Gassmann had previously volunteered with the Bourne Historical Society, which is also located at the historical center.

With her family having lived in Bourne since approximately 1905 and various family members owning properties at one point along Shore Road, Alona Avenue, and Monument Avenue, Gassmann shared that she enjoyed spending summers in Bourne.

Originally from the Berkshires, she moved to Boston to study opera at the Boston Conservatory at Berklee. She eventually attended Emerson College to become a theater teacher—a position she held on Martha’s Vineyard until she moved back to Pittsfield, then returned to Bourne to be closer to her mother.

The next order of business was for the commission to elect its officers, as it does annually towards the beginning of the fiscal year.

Commission member Judith A. Riordan made the sole nomination motion to have secretary Deborah M. Burgess cast one vote to elect Steven Philbrick as chairman, Donald J. Mahoney as vice chairman and Deborah M. Burgess as secretary, which was seconded by member Jean Campbell.

“Therefore, I will cast one vote to elect the new slate of officers,” Burgess said. “And we thank you Neil [Langille], for your years of service. You’re not leaving us, you’re just stepping back a little bit.”

“It’s been a pleasure to serve,” Langille said, having been chairman on and off since 2006. He added that the commission “is in very good hands.”

Langille will continue to serve as the commission’s representative to the Community Preservation Committee until his term expires in 2027, in addition to serving alongside Philbrick as the commission’s representative on the Bourne Historical Center Board of Governors.
