Title: Bourne Finance Committee Hears FY27 Capital Requests
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-02-13T00:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-finance-committee-hears-fy27-capital-requests/article_ca4719fb-876c-4433-9d51-a87fb34bb04a.html

With Bourne’s Fiscal Year 2027 budget sent to the Finance Committee, department heads presented their capital requests to the committee.

On Monday , February 9 , Hannah Lawrence, director of the Department of National Resources (DNR), presented the DNR and Shore Harbor Committee’s annual request of $250,000 to fund the capital project of dredging, ramp and pier repair and maintenance.

Lawrence said that dredging projects occur when permitting allows and should be done annually. This depends on the project’s scope and permitting stage.

At $5,700 per set of personal protection equipment (PPE), Fire Chief David S. Pelonzi presented the request for $275,000 of free cash to buy 48 complete sets of personal protection equipment (PPE) gear for everyone in the department. Bourne firefighters have two sets of custom-fitted gear, each with a 10-year service life.

The Fire Department also requested $85,000 in free cash for a new Ford F-150 pickup to replace the fire prevention officer’s current truck, a 2014 Chevy Tahoe. Acting as a mobile office for emergency responses and fire prevention, the new truck will decrease cross-contamination as work gear can be stored separately from the passenger compartment.

Department of Public Works Director Matthew Sawicki presented the Sewer Department’s request for $732,000 from enterprise debt for construction, inspections, engineering, construction administration and programming of the Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition (SCADA) system to monitor the municipally owned sewer pump stations. The initial design request was approved in FY26.

The alarm systems, flow data and pump controls from Main Street to Hideaway Village are from the 1990s and have fulfilled their “useful life and replacement parts are not easily accessible,” the project request stated. The new system will improve day-to-day monitoring abilities.

On February 2, several other department heads shared capital requests on behalf of their departments.

Town Engineer Timothy Lydon presented the Sagamore Beach ramp project to upgrade the drainage facility and improve access to the stairs for construction equipment to get to the beach. The project would also aim to improve coastal resiliency. The area is deemed vulnerable in terms of hazard mitigation.

The proposed funding is $200,000 as a Community Preservation Act (CPA) project. The project has already received permitting from the Conservation Commission. As a CPA project, it is due to the Community Preservation Committee by Wednesday , February 11 .

Finance Committee member Carla Emmons asked about the construction vehicles using the ramp to access the beaches.

“Sometimes it’s really the only way that they can access it. I mean, accessing it with a barge and moving it with the tides, you’re really limited in what you can do with the eroding coastal dune and coastal bluff,” Lydon said. “In several areas where private homeowners are reinforcing the coastal bluff and the coastal bluff abutting our town property…It’s almost like a public-private partnership to maintain this coastal bluff for as long as possible because it would maintain public assets as well.”

Lydon cited examples of that partnership. After the 2018 Nor’easter season, the beach had lost five feet of sand and houses needed rebuilding; there were excavators repairing the damage. He also referenced some recent examples in which access agreements were negotiated for using the ramps. “In that access agreement, there’s a lot of liability that they take on,” Lydon said of the contractors. “They indemnify the town and you know, there’s insurance involved.” When there has been damage, “they’re on the hook to come out and rebuild it,” he said.

Lydon also shared the Engineering Department’s project of upgrading the Geographic Information System (GIS) mapping, since the department uses handwritten access maps. Digitizing maps will make upgrades and maintenance easier, as well as allowing for a forward-facing GIS that the public, town staff and committees can use. The “small maintenance fees would be built into the budget. The proposed funding is $30,000 of free cash.

The Police Department had requested $275,000 of free cash for three new patrol vehicles: two Dodge Durangos and one Chevy Tahoe. Both models offer accessibility and versatility for the department, Police Chief Brandon M. Esip said. The fully equipped Durangos cost $91,000 each and the fully equipped Tahoe costs $93,000.

As part of an annual vehicle request, Esip said the department had reduced its initial request from five to three. “Because we have reduced the number of vehicles that we’re requesting this year, if the vehicle can be utilized by us, we will keep it in our fleet and move it down to a detailed vehicle that’s not going to be a patrol vehicle,” he said. “So, we make that assessment as the vehicles come in.”

Esip presented the upgrade for a new record management system for the department. The proposed funding is $163,000 of free cash. The current system was installed in the mid-90s. Esip explained the need for a new system that would give officers access to real-time data while out in the field.

Sawicki requested $594,000 for the design of a new Singing Bridge in Pocasset. However, the plan is to offset half of the cost with Chapter 90 funding, so the capital request would be reduced to $297,000. There is also the possibility of covering the entire cost using Community Preservation Act (CPA) funding under the historic structure category.

He requested a full replacement of the bridge since they would “get about 100 years out of the bridge,” whereas repairs would only last around 10 years. The design would include various components such as engineering, environmental permitting, community engagement, wetlands delineation, hydraulics, geotechnical and tidal monitoring. Submissions to the Massachusetts Department of Transportation Chapter 85 program, which is required for bridge work, and to the town are being reviewed.

“This is going to be a major project for the town for the DPW. It’s going to have a significant impact on the residents,” Sawicki said. “During this design process, we’re going to make sure we include the residents throughout the project and also we’re going to look into possibly grant funding opportunities.”

Finance Committee member Arthur Wayne Sampson then asked what the project’s timetable would be. Sawicki said it would take about a year and a half to two years to complete the full design.

Finance Committee vice chairwoman Amanda Bongiovanni asked if the replacement would be exact or if some adjustments would be made, to which Sawicki replied that this will be part of the design, but said, “We have to work with the area we have there.”

Integrated Solid Waste Management requested $634,350 from retained earnings to replace a front-end loader, which is replaced on an alternating schedule and has a life span of six to seven years. The loaders are used for debris and moving materials. ISWM operations manager Asa Mintz said that Caterpillar offered $155,000 for a trade-in. That amount was applied to the capital request.

Mintz also presented the request for $13,516,000 from borrowing for the Transfer Station construction. The aforementioned amount was generated by a feasibility study, Mintz explained. At the last Town Meeting, $1.134 million was appropriated for architectural and engineering services. “By backing out the total value minus the $1.134 million, we get the remainder of $13.516 million,” he said on January 20. The requested number is based on the feasibility study, and as the design phase begins, Mintz said they will get a more final cost.

The project will continue the development on the 12-acre parcel as the proposed transfer station will “handle C&D, recycling as well as the [municipal solid waste] once the landfill closes,” he said.

In regards to different stakeholders involved, Weston and Samson have been retained. The ISWM Building Committee will oversee the project. Pomeroy Associates will continue to serve as the Owner’s Project Manager (OPM) and the ISWM Building Committee has included the project under their scope.

“Every single department had to make cuts on the capital budget. They came in with a number of other items that were not approved because of the financial situation of the town,” Sampson said of his observations while serving on the Capital Outlay Committee during the capital request process. “Not only do we have to worry about the reduced financial status this year, but it also begs the question, how are we going to face a continuing number of requests next year?”

“I want to thank all of the department heads who...came back a second time and reduced it down,” Sampson said. “Then the [Capital Outlay Committee], we took the 10 that we thought were important issues and we fit in what we could fit in based on the money that was available.”

On January 13, the Select Board voted to review deferred FY27 capital projects during FY27 Phase Two, also referred to as Fall Town Meeting.

“Capital projects that we cannot fund at the May Town Meeting will be discussed again before the Fall Town Meeting,” Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem said in an email to the Enterprise. “The Capital Outlay Committee will meet with the department heads in early September to review the projects again and decide what should be recommended for funding in the Fall.”
