Title: Bourne Select Board, FinCom Begin Town Meeting Recommendations
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-04-02T21:30:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-select-board-fincom-begin-town-meeting-recommendations/article_c9bc597a-71c7-4f8e-b637-1aea01d0c47b.html

The Bourne Select Board met on Tuesday , March 31, and Finance Committee met on Monday , March 30, and Wednesday , April 1, to make recommendations for some of the articles on the draft Annual and Special Town Meeting warrants.

Both slated for Monday, May 4, the Annual Town Meeting will determine the upcoming Fiscal Year 2027, and the Special Town Meeting will allow for adjustments to be made to the current FY26.

The Special and Annual Town Meeting articles that the Select Board and Finance Committee did not review this week will be reviewed next week as the committee and board continue to make their recommendations prior to the Select Board signing off on both warrants on Tuesday, April 14.

The Select Board and Finance Committee voted to designate Articles one through five as essential articles. This designation means that the articles are necessary for the Town of Bourne’s operations and are legally required.

Article 1 is the consent agenda, which includes regular required authorizations, elected officials’ salaries, Chapter 90, revolving funds, and accrued contractual compensated absences. These items “recur annually and are housekeeping in nature,” the draft warrant explained. The Select Board and Finance Committee recommended the article.

Article 3 , which is sponsored by the Board of Sewer Commissioners, requests $1,949,450 for the FY27 Sewer Enterprise Fund. It also requests that “$181,283 be transferred to the General Fund to offset Sewer Enterprise indirect expenses and in order to meet this appropriation, we move that the sum of $2,030,733 be raised from Sewer Enterprise receipts and $100,000 be transferred from Sewer Enterprise retained earnings.” The Finance Committee voted to recommend the article.

Sponsored by the Select Board, Article 4 requests $15,380,924 for the FY27 Integrated Solid Waste Management Program (ISWM) Enterprise operating budget and that “$2,784,942 be transferred to the General Fund to offset ISWM Enterprise indirect expenses, and in order to meet this appropriation, we move that the sum of $18,165,866 be raised from ISWM Enterprise receipts.” The Finance Committee voted to recommend the article.

Article 5, the Select Board and the Capital Outlay Committee sponsored a number of requests totaling $2,961,350 to cover the costs of capital outlay projects. The Engineering Department requested $30,000 from free cash for GIS map digitization. The Shore and Harbor Department requested $250,000 from the Waterways Improvement Fund for annual dredging and repairs to ramps and piers.

The Police Department requested $275,000 from free cash to replace three vehicles and $163,000 from free cash for a new records management system. The Fire Department requested $275,000 from free cash to replace firefighters’ structural personal protection equipment and $85,000 from free cash to replace the fire prevention officer’s truck. Bourne Public Schools requested $150,000 from free cash for safety and security upgrades, as well as $70,000 from free cash for window security.

The Department of Public Works requested $297,000 from free cash to design a new Singing Bridge in Pocasset. The Sewer Department requested $732,000 from enterprise borrowings for the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system to monitor the municipally owned sewer pump stations. ISWM requested $634,350 from enterprise retained earnings to replace a front-end loader.

Both the Select Board and Finance Committee voted to recommend the article.

Article 6 , which is sponsored by the Select Board, requests that Town Meeting “rescind the vote taken under Article 5-12 of the May 2024 Annual Town Meeting, which authorized the Town to borrow funds for the purpose of the school [wastewater treatment plant] repairs.” The Finance Committee voted to recommend the article.

Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo suggested that the explanation provided in the voters’ handbook state that the scope of the work on the wastewater treatment plant changed, and different funds are being used, so the borrowing, which was previously approved, is no longer needed. The Select Board voted to recommend the article with the additional explanation in the handbook.

Article 11 , which is sponsored by the Select Board, would allow Town Meeting to hear reports and recommendations from committees and town or state officers. Both the Select Board and Finance Committee voted to recommend the article.

Articles 12 through 15 and 17 through 19 are Community Preservation Act-funded projects and are all sponsored by the Community Preservation Committee. The funds can be spent on several types of projects, including affordable housing, historic preservation, and open space/recreation.

The Recreation Department requested $400,000 in Article 12 for the design and construction of the Cataumet Schoolhouse hardcourt project, which would feature a new post-tension concrete court with a 20-year guarantee and fencing to address disrepair, as well as improvements to make the parking, path, and court compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). The Select Board voted to recommend the article.

Finance Committee member Arthur Wayne Sampson stated he was not sure if the request was complete. Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem said that she thought the request was complete. The Finance Committee voted to recommend the article.

The Recreation Department requested $350,000 in Article 13 for the Bourne Veteran’s Memorial Community Center shade structures project to provide two 15-foot cantilevered shade structures and ADA-compliant seating and walkways. The Select Board voted to recommend the article.

Finance Committee vice chairwoman Amanda Bongiovanni stated that natural shade options should be discussed. Finance Committee clerk Carla Emmons agreed that other shade alternatives should be discussed, however she also agreed with the project’s proposal to provide seating. The Finance Committee voted not to recommend the article.

The Facilities Department requested $77,0000 in Article 14 to “fund the design costs associated with repairing the exterior envelope of Town Hall, including, but not limited to, design of masonry and window repairs to prevent water infiltration.” Both the Select Board and the Finance Committee voted to recommend the article.

The School Department requested $30,000 in Article 15 for a feasibility study of the central school administration building at 36 Sandwich Road to address siding and trim, which are both nearing the end of their useful lives; the front ramp and stairs, which are cracked; the rusted back entrance staircase; and water penetration at the back entrance. Both the Select Board and the Finance Committee voted to recommend the article.

Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian recused herself from the discussions for Article 17 and 18 to avoid the appearance of conflict; she and her husband own ResCOM Architectural Incorporated, and Housing Assistance Corporation (HAC) is a client.

HAC requests $100,000 in Article 17 for the renovation of 460 West Main Street in Hyannis to house Assistance Resource Shelter, Cape Cod’s only state-licensed emergency overnight individual shelter, “ upon the conditions set forth and incorporated in the application of Housing Assistance Corporation, including the execution of a grant agreement.” HAC is seeking $100,000 from every Cape town.

No recommendations were made by the board and the committee, as the Select Board decided to defer in order to get town counsel’s opinion on the use of CPA funds for a shelter. Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti and member Mary Jane Mastrangelo stated that it is a great project.

The Bourne Affordable Housing Trust requests $111,500 in Article 18 to support its Fiscal Year 2027 budget and affordable housing services. The partnership is solely financed through CPA funds. The funds would assist with purchasing housing, support legal fees, and support continued monitoring by HAC of properties to ensure their affordability, inspections, contributions to home lotteries, grant writing, and Cape Cod Commission assistance.

The Finance Committee voted to recommend this article. The Select Board deferred making a recommendation until the next meeting.

The Community Preservation Committee requests $75,000 in Article 19 for the CPC’s administrative and operating expenses for Fiscal Year 2027. Requested for the past five years, the funds cover administrative services and costs, such as an appraisal report. Remaining funds go back to Community Preservation Funds. Both the Select Board and the Finance Committee voted to recommend all the articles.

Article 23 is a request by the Human Services Committee to transfer $40,000 from free cash to fund the human services grant program for FY27. Both the Select Board and the Finance Committee voted to recommend the article.

Article 24 was a proposal requesting $160,000 for a two-year pilot program to provide a healthcare screening for Bourne firefighters. Article 25 was a request for $50,000 in non-capital purchases for the next fiscal year for items that are one-time costs but do not reach the $25,000 threshold for capital equipment purchases.

McCollem recommended, after free cash analysis and mitigating the FY26 snow and ice budget, removing both articles from the Annual Town Meeting warrant and deferring it to the Fall Town Meeting. The Select Board voted to remove the articles from the warrant.

A rticle 26 would have the Town Meeting vote to authorize “the treasurer to dispose of certain abandoned funds, including uncashed municipal checks, with the provisions of said law.” Accepting the statute would “expedite the resolution process for unclaimed funds and prevent the eventual escheatment of the funds to the State Treasurer.”

The Finance Committee voted to recommend the article. The Select Board had initially voted 2-3 to not recommend the article, with Select Board clerk Jeanne L. Azarovitz and member Peter J. Meier voting to recommend the article and Ferretti, Siroonian and Mastrangelo voting not to recommend the article.

The Select Board then voted to remove the article from the Annual Town Meeting warrant and defer it to the Fall Town Meeting. “I would like more explanation,” Mastrangelo said. “I was willing to consider it.”

Article 27 would have Town Meeting vote to increase the demand fees assessed on unpaid taxes from $15 to $30. Article 28 would increase dog licensing fees from $7 to $10 for spayed female and neutered male dogs and from $10 to $15 for both male and female dogs. Article 29 would increase vital records fees. Birth, death and marriage certificates fees would increase from $10 to $15. And marriage intentions fees would increase from $25 to $40.

Both the Select Board and the Finance Committee voted to recommend all three articles.

Article 31 , sponsored by the Planning Board, would amend the Town of Bourne’s accessory dwelling unit (ADU) zoning bylaw to align it with state regulations. The proposed changes include allowing ADUs in downtown neighborhood districts, changing the required number of parking spaces for ADUs, and removing lot size and owner-occupancy requirements.

Article 32 , which is also sponsored by the Planning Board, would amend the Town of Bourne’s zoning bylaw to increase the maximum front setback from 15 feet to 30 feet for parcels that are located in the downtown district, but not on a primary street.

Both the Select Board and the Finance Committee voted to recommend the two articles.

The Special Town Meeting was called to provide an opportunity to vote on a budget adjustment for FY26.

Article 1 , which is sponsored by the Select Board, requests funds to pay unpaid bills from the Fiscal Year 2025, including a missed encumbrance of one month’s legal bills as well as other small items. The Finance Committee deferred making a recommendation until its next meeting.

Article 2 , sponsored by the Select Board, is requesting to appropriate $470,000 in free cash to Public Works. This would assist in covering the $800,000 deficit in the FY26 snow and ice budget.

This article would offset the costs from this past winter by spending down reserves and using the free cash that had funded Articles 24 and 25, which have been deferred to the fall, McCollem said, adding that the departments would “cover the rest of the deficit with year-end transfers at the end of the fiscal year.”

While the town is allowed to deficit spend in the snow and ice budget and raise the budget on the recap sheet, this would be at a cost to the taxpayer.

Finance Committee chairman James D. Sullivan asked if the costs were to be applied to taxpayers, “Would that just be one year at one-time extra charge?” McCollem said that would be the case, but “I feel very strongly that we should try to mitigate that and avoid doing that at all costs.”

Sullivan asked what the FY26 snow and ice budget was for this past winter. It was budgeted at $338,000, McCollem said, noting that the budget is on a five-year rolling lookback. She also added that since “this winter is not included when we built [FY27 budget] back in November...it is possible that we will be going to Fall Town Meeting to readjust the snow and ice budget for FY27 once we have the final numbers for this winter.”

“We have had a lot of mild winters,” Bongiovanni noted, “except for this one.”

The Finance Committee voted to recommend the article to Special Town Meeting warrant.
