Title: Bourne Select Board Votes On Officer Positions
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-27T13:45:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-select-board-votes-on-officer-positions/article_c559c307-43d5-406d-b418-8198ebadc4d1.html

Melissa A. Ferretti and Anne-Marie Siroonian will retain their positions as chairwoman and vice chairwoman of the Bourne Select Board, respectively, and Mary Jane Mastrangelo was newly voted to serve as the board’s clerk, after the board discussed and voted on the matter at its meeting on Tuesday , May 26 .

Each year, after Annual Town Meeting and election, the Select Board has the opportunity to reconfigure.

Having served as chairwoman for the first time this past year, Ferretti had written a letter of intent to hold her position.

Ferretti stated her desire to complete projects. “When I take on something, I make a commitment to see it through. I always finish what I start, and I like to do things the right way,” Ferretti wrote.

A motion to nominate Ferretti for chairwoman by Siroonian was seconded by then-clerk Jeanne L. Azarovitz.

Discussion then ensued, with then-member Mary Jane Mastrangelo stating that although she understands Ferretti’s interest in the role, she does not support a second term.

Citing her “own experience as chair for two years,” as well as another time when a chair served two years, Mastrangelo said, “I think it’s not advisable. I don’t think it’s good for the chair. I don’t think it’s good for the board.”

In addition to highlighting the difficulty of the role, she said that it is important for everyone on the board to experience serving as chairperson, noting her hope that Siroonian or Azarovitz would have been interested in the position.

Mastrangelo shared her hope that the board would complete its annual goal reviews, six-month and quarterly policy reviews, and discuss its capital plan, as the board’s responsibility as the town’s policymaking entity.

Board member Peter J. Meier said it is “healthy to change out leadership, just so it is not overbearing on someone.”

On the other hand, Azarovitz stated that she believes that “some continuity, especially in someone who wants to step up and continue in this role as chair, is worth supporting.”

Azarovitz said that, despite some tension and a lot of items to “discuss and juggle,” which made it challenging to gain traction on the board’s goals, she believes the past year “went well” and that she is looking “forward to a productive retreat this year.”

In response to Mastrangelo’s comments, Siroonian stated that “ironically, for the reasons you stated, are the reasons I would want to have Melissa have the opportunity to get to those things, because I think that intent is there.”

“We’ve had some real curveballs and some sidetracking that we’ve had to move around,” Siroonian said, similar to Azarovitz’s statements.

She added that she wanted to give the “opportunity for [Ferretti] to come full circle” to lead the board through conducting reviews about goals, policy and capital, because “those are some of the things that I myself want to see happen as well and strongly agree with.” She noted that she believes it is Ferretti’s intention to “get back to looking at those goals.”

Prefacing her appreciation for Mastrangelo’s comments, Ferretti noted her support for Mastrangelo and Meier when they had previously chosen to run for a second term.

Reflecting on when she voted in favor of Meier as chairman, she highlighted that she did so because she thought he had “shown the initiative, and you wanted to serve… You had wanted to continue and keep the momentum going.”

Ferretti said that she had voted for Mastrangelo as chairwoman for a second term.

“I offered you the same courtesy because I felt that you had the qualities to carry it and you wanted to sit in that role,” she said. “Why would I not support you during that?”

Ferretti said that she recognizes that there is “a lot to do,” including the items Mastrangelo mentioned, and shared that she has been actively working to have the board complete those items.

Per her responsibility as chairwoman, Ferretti meets weekly with Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem to prepare the agenda for the upcoming Select Board meeting. Ferretti added that she invites Siroonian to join the meeting as vice chairwoman to “show the public that it is not just the chair doing the work.” She noted that they do not violate the Open Meeting Law during these conversations.

An Open Meeting Law violation would occur if three members, a quorum or the majority of the board, were to meet outside of a Select Board meeting.

“She’s there for me to help me when I need her, and I know the rest of the board would do the same if I needed the help,” Ferretti added. “We haven’t accomplished everything, but hopefully this year, we can do more.”

Azarovitz, Siroonian, and Ferretti voted in favor of reappointing Ferretti as chairwoman, with Meier and Mastrangelo voting against.

Next up for discussion and vote was the position of vice chairperson. Meier made a motion to nominate Siroonian, which Azarovitz seconded.

Meier, Siroonian, Azarovitz and Ferretti voted affirmatively to reappoint Siroonian as vice chairwoman. Mastrangelo was the sole dissenting vote, stating her concern with the vice chairperson participating in the pre-meeting discussion with the chairwoman, creating an Open Meeting Law violation if one of the two were to speak to other board members about the meeting’s substance.

“You never talk to anybody else on the board after?” Mastrangelo asked. Ferretti replied, “No, no, no,” and Siroonian stated, “Absolutely not.”

“It is just about the agenda,” Siroonian said of the context of the pre-meeting discussion.

Mastrangelo rephrased her concern, stating that she has “felt several times that we have an agenda item on a meeting, and you guys have discussed it extensively,” citing that “there are these statements ‘We think we’re going to do it this way.’”

“I am not sure what the ‘We think’ is,” Mastrangelo said, suggesting that it gives the impression that the “pre-meeting discussion has created an atmosphere of the decision already being made.”

“We’re very fortunate to have five members because it does allow us to have some communication,” Azarovitz noted. “I appreciate that we’ve been able to accomplish what we have done in the past year, considering all the hardballs we’ve been thrown and obstacles.”

The board voted unanimously to approve a motion by Azarovitz to nominate Mastrangelo as clerk, thereby concluding the reconfiguration of the board.

The results were effective immediately after the votes were taken.
