Title: Bourne Select Board Deliberates On Watershed Permits Process
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-03T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-select-board-deliberates-on-watershed-permits-process/article_183f61e5-ad50-4298-855d-6d7c355efba4.html

The Bourne Select Board continued its discussion on Tuesday , June 30, in regard to obtaining watershed permits for the town’s two watershed areas: Phinneys Harbor and Megansett Squeteague Harbor.

The two harbors are designated as Natural Resource Nitrogen Sensitive Areas by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. On July 7, 2023, MassDEP changed Title 5 regulations for Natural Resource Nitrogen Sensitive Areas in towns across Cape Cod to achieve estuarine water quality standards. The 15 municipalities comprising the Cape had until July 7, 2025, to file a notice of intent (NOI), which Bourne had done.

The new regulations had stated that watershed permits in Title 5 are optional, meaning that if a town had not applied for the permit, the regulations would have required homeowners residing in those watersheds to upgrade their existing septic systems to the best available nitrogen-reducing technology, within the next five years.

However, since the town submitted an NOI, it suspended this aforementioned requirement that homeowners would have had to fulfill. The town now has until 2030 to file its watershed permits with MassDEP and have the department approve them.

The first order of business at Tuesday’s meeting was a continued discussion related to Select Board members recusing themselves.

Last fall, the Ethics Commission had given the advice that Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian and then-member Mary Jane Mastrangelo recuse themselves since they both live in areas of concern and may experience financial impacts from the permits. Both Siroonian and Mastrangelo recused themselves from that meeting .

The Ethics Commission had noted that since the conversations pertaining to the watershed permits were not general policy discussions, the “10% of population exemption was not applicable,” Mastrangelo recollected. “I said at the time that I did not agree with that position, but that I would recuse myself at that time.”

Often referred to as the general policy exemption, it allows a public official to participate in government discussions, even if they may have a financial impact, depending on whether that financial impact affects at least 10% of the population, the state’s website stated.

Mastrangelo stated that since the fall, she has been in correspondence with an attorney from the Ethics Commission on the matter. Mastrangelo added that the motivation to request a written opinion in April in regard to her involvement in the NOI phase of the watershed permitting process stemmed from the realization that she was no longer receiving agendas or packet information about the watershed permitting process.

“In no other situation, I am aware of, has a Select Board member not received the agenda information and the packet for an agenda item that they have been documented for recusing,” she stated. “Select Board members have always received the same information and recuse themselves from the discussion when the Select Board member deems it was appropriate.”

Referencing exemptions allowed under Massachusetts Ethics Laws and Regulations, Mastrangelo stated that she should be able to participate since the “discussions qualify as general policy...my financial interest as a homeowner or resident are the same as the other homeowners and residents in the watershed…the nitrogen sensitive area watershed population is substantial, which by the definition means greater than 10% of the population.”

Mastrangelo added that she no longer lives in the Megansett Squeteague Harbor watershed, in which 3.9% of the town’s population resides; rather, she now only lives in the Phinneys Harbor watershed, which houses 13.2% of the town’s population.

Since she had not yet received a response from the Ethics Commission, Mastrangelo stated that she would recuse herself from the watershed permit discussion from Tuesday’s meeting.

“I do, however, expect to receive agendas and packet information, and to be able to make a decision to recuse myself, as appropriate, on agenda items under discussion,” Mastrangelo added.

Not wanting to “inadvertently do anything improper,” Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem also contacted the Ethics Commission on the matter. “The extent of my conversation is that if a member has told me that they’ve recused, I should not include them,” she stated.

McCollem told the board that if “members want to make a decision [to recuse] on a case-by-case basis, I’m happy to send information.” She added that is how Mastrangelo received information for Tuesday’s meeting.

Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti inquired whether that would be putting McCollem in a situation where she is violating the ethics laws, to which McCollem said it would not. “Once I have been told someone has recused, then I want to make sure that I’m behaving appropriately with that information.”

Ferretti summarized her understanding that if a board member asks for meeting information and receives it, but is violating ethics laws, McCollem would not be at fault; the board member would be. “Correct,” McCollem replied. “It’s the member’s responsibility to comply.”

Mastrangelo noted that she did not understand that saying she was recusing herself at the meeting in the fall would result in her no longer receiving any information about the current watershed permit process.

Since she still had not heard back from the Ethics Commission with its opinion and she herself is undecided in her final decision, Mastrangelo said that she would like to receive the commission’s “written opinion before I permanently recuse or not.”

When a Select Board member recuses themselves, it “does not negate your right to speak on the issue or to express your opinion on the issue–doesn’t take away your free speech rights,” Mastrangelo added, citing research that she had done herself on the matter. “I think people are often encouraged to leave the room and not participate so they don’t have any influence, but it’s not required.”

With Mastrangelo recusing herself from the following agenda item, Select Board members Jeanne L. Azarovitz, Peter J. Meier and Ferretti turned to focus on reviewing a draft request for qualifications (RFQ) for engineering and consulting services for the two watershed permits.

The draft now includes the edits suggested at the board’s previous meeting on the matter , McCollem stated, adding that the town counsel’s standard contract would be included in the RFQ when it is made public.

McCollem shared that the scope of the work, as noted in the RFQ, focuses on the first phase, which includes reaching a baseline agreement with MassDEP about “the amount of nitrogen that has to be revoked” and “creating a methodology” for the watershed permit.

If the board were to approve the RFQ, then it could be made public in the middle of next week, McCollem said. Firms interested in working with the town on the watershed permits would have until early August to submit a RFQ through which they can share their credentials, expertise and abilities with the town.

McCollem noted that in the next couple of weeks, before the RFQ deadline, the board should decide how the RFQs would be reviewed. She recommended that this review team should also conduct interviews with the final firms before a firm is selected.

Meier suggested that a public steering committee could be assembled to serve as the review team. “I don’t think it’s a bad idea,” Ferretti said, adding that the board will have to decide who comprises the review team and what its charge would be.

McCollem noted that this would be the board’s decision to determine. Noting the time constraint to decide on and assemble a review team with August only a couple of weeks away, the board decided to continue discussing the topic.

Ultimately, the board unanimously voted to accept the draft RFQ as presented and include the town counsel’s standard contract as well.
