Title: Bourne Select Board Hears Update On MOU Progress
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-24T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-select-board-hears-update-on-mou-progress/article_9c8d7286-f9d2-4e3e-b5ee-bd7b549344ff.html

Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem provided an update to the Select Board in regard to the development of a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) regarding the Cape Cod bridges replacement project during a meeting held on Tuesday , July 21 .

The board also formulated its questions in preparation for MassDOT’s design public hearing held on Thursday , July 23 .

At its last meeting on the matter on June 30, the board had unanimously authorized McCollem to contact Cape Cod Commission to inquire about utilizing their services to assist the town in developing an MOU with MassDOT.

Having since spoken to Cape Cod Commission Executive Director Kristy Senatori and Deputy Director Steven Tupper, McCollem shared that the commission will “formally respond” to the board and share what the commission “can assist with and what they maybe cannot assist with.”

While the commission did share that it cannot provide the Town of Bourne legal advice, McCollem said that it would “spend some time thinking about areas where they do have expertise that we don’t have local expertise, and how to supplement this process and guide you.”

When the Enterprise reached out in regard to the status of town counsel’s current involvement with the MOU, McCollem responded via email on Thursday , July 23, that she was unable to elaborate further than what she stated at Tuesday’s meeting.

Select Board member Peter J. Meier said that it was his understanding that the Town of Bourne has a mitigation fund with the Cape Cod Commission as well, which he proposed could also be another way to fund professional assistance.

Select Board member Jeanne L. Azarovitz proposed establishing communication lines among MassDOT, Bourne Town Hall, Bourne Police and Fire departments, Bourne Public Schools and the Bike and Pedestrian Committee. She noted the significance of having a traffic management plan to ensure that emergency services can access the bridge, as well as providing regular updates to the town. Azarovitz also emphasized the need to have evacuation plans.

Noting that there should be a plan to ensure that local roads are maintained, Azarovitz proposed that navigation guides not divert highway traffic through local roads. Meier suggested that the town have MassDOT contact Waze, Google Maps and Apple to implement that. Select Board clerk Mary Jane Mastrangelo noted that this could also include mitigating large trucks using smaller, local back roads as through roads.

Engaging in an MOU would provide “clarity” to the aforementioned points as to who is responsible for what and what is expected of stakeholders, vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian said, before inquiring whether it was a “done deal” that the bridges would become state property. Meier replied that it was his understanding “that’s what is intended.”

“I do think that an MOU is a really critical thing we should be talking about because it gives us the opportunity to talk about how we’re going to keep it in shape,” board clerk Mary Jane Mastrangelo said. “We can sit here, we can throw out all these ideas, but how are they getting properly communicated as a position of the Select Board?”

Mastrangelo emphasized the importance of getting decisions between the Town of Bourne and MassDOT in writing, for example, the decisions regarding Keith Field, Sandwich Road and the Canal Service Road. She noted that, as Meier had pointed out earlier in the meeting, MassDOT’s proposed plan for the detour around Canal Service Road does not reflect the most recent discussions about the need for an improved detour.

“I do think we can negotiate some things that are going to make a quality-of-life difference in Bourne in the long run,” Mastrangelo said of the town’s opportunity to discuss transportation infrastructure in Bourne with MassDOT.

Although the new bridges would provide new infrastructure, Meier stated his concern with the proposed design’s capability to “fix the traffic,” noting that current traffic flow proves to be an “onslaught.”

“If we’re going to take over the maintenance of these bridges moving forward…we need to have a dedicated appropriation in the state budget every year for the short-term and long-term maintenance for all of these bridges,” Meier proposed.

The Town of Bourne needs to have “communication protocols” with MassDOT to allow the town and its residents to be informed throughout the project about “key points, meetings, design changes, advanced sharing of construction schedules,” chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti said.

Concerned about traffic, she proposed that the town receive a “guaranteed early review diversion plan” to be able to “protect local roads.” Ferretti suggested that the traffic management plan should also feature arrangements to ensure access across the bridges for public school transportation and emergency services.

Ferretti noted that the town should be informed by MassDOT about construction stages and potential local impact, such as hours of operation, noise, restrictions and environmental and cultural considerations.

“We need to be able to know what’s going on there,” she said, emphasizing the importance of transparency and having a communication plan. “Residents need accurate information.”

Ferretti added that the town needs to have a “formal process” to review comments and documents related to the project.

Noting that the MOU should last the duration of the project, Ferretti emphasized that “the MOU should be flexible” and allow amendments as “the project evolves.”

Several Bourne residents spoke at the board’s meeting on Tuesday to share perspectives and suggestions.

Susan Baracchini emphasized how Bourne residents can assist so the board is not alone in undertaking the magnitude of this project: “None of you have done this before. None of us have done this before, but there are a lot of smart people in the area who have experience, whether it’s career-wise, personal experience, who can interject and provide ideas of questions that we need to ask.”

She said that on Wednesday , July 22, the board should submit a request for an MOU to be established with MassDOT by Thursday’s hearing, so the request is already in writing.

Paul Alfano emphasized that the Town of Bourne should be asking and negotiating for commitments by MassDOT to the community. “All they can say is ‘No,’” he added.

Bourne Intermediate School’s Parent-Teacher Association chairwoman Meg Good Murner stated the importance of implementing a transportation plan for schools. She noted that “even this past June, we had buses arriving two hours late to school.”

Prefacing his appreciation of the Select Board as its members are required to very quickly become “experts in 50 different disciplines and then insert local knowledge into this arcane process,” Bob Dwyer noted that the board needs professional assistance. A request for “professional help that they pay for and you direct” should be featured in the MOU, he added.

Citing the power behind the town acting as a united front in its communications with MassDOT, John York suggested that the board establish standards with MassDOT to ensure that it presents data and information in an accessible format and location.

The board further discussed comments regarding the MassDOT public design hearing planned for Thursday , July 23 . The Enterprise will provide more information on the public design hearing held on Thursday evening in next week’s edition.
