Title: Bourne Seeks Volunteers For Charter Review Committee And More
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-01-07T12:45:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-seeks-volunteers-for-charter-review-committee-and-more/article_6c5456a0-2d54-49e6-996b-0520314a20ec.html

The Town of Bourne is seeking volunteers for its committees, commissions and boards, as approximately 20 out of 35 have at least one seat available for interested citizens, said Kathleen Thut, executive assistant to the town administrator.

“This is a resident’s opportunity to shape the future of Bourne,” Thut said. “Historically, committees have built buildings and parks, decided to enact rules, policies and law, and helped determine how tax dollars are spent, among other purposes.”

Among the groups looking for new members are the Police Station Roof Committee, the Commission on Disabilities, the Education/Scholarship Committee and the Energy Advisory Committee. A complete list of the openings can be found at townofbourne.com/board-committee-and-commission-vacancies .

The town is also seeking to form a Charter Review Committee . After adopting a home rule charter in 2001, the town’s form of government was defined as a town administrator appointed by an elected five-member Select Board.

Seven residents are appointed to serve on the committee, “an essential body charged with evaluating and recommending updates to the Town’s Charter, the foundational document that defines how Bourne’s local government functions, ” the town said in a press release. The last committee was appointed in 2020.

“Every five years, the Town is required by State law to undertake this important process to ensure the Charter remains current, responsive, and reflective of the needs of the community,” the press release said. “The committee will play a key role in reviewing as well as proposing amendments aimed to improve governance and accountability with the structure, powers, and responsibilities, without changing the basic form of government or other state statute-regulated authorities.”

However, only Town Meeting can significantly change the charter. The committee also cannot review any board operating under state statute, such as the School Committee or Board of Health.

Active for approximately a year, over the course of which members will attend meetings, gather information from town officials and the public and analyze the charter, the committee will then present a report with its findings at Town Meeting.

Those interested in joining the Charter Review Committee, as well as several other committees and boards, are not required to have government experience.

“Almost all [positions] just entail a desire to improve the lives of Bourne residents and visitors, and a bit of time,” Thut said.

The purpose and level of commitment for each group is unique, with some meeting weekly, monthly or only two times a year. Sometimes groups are not always able to achieve a quorum, the minimum number of members required to have a meeting, for a variety of reasons. The Historical Commission has been seeking new members after member Karl Spilhaus retired this past summer, and member Blanche E. Cody died on Christmas Eve in 2024. The Commission on Disabilities has also had trouble reaching a quorum. The last time the commission was able to meet was in October.

“Unfortunately, a number of members have been unable to attend due to personal issues and challenges, which has prevented us from making quorum at our last few scheduled meetings,” Commission on Disabilities chair Marc Brunco said. “We do have one vacancy on the commission, and if someone is interested in joining, all they have to do is reach out to the Select Board.”

As an advisory panel, the Commission on Disabilities guides the town on matters relating to disability, accessibility, the state law pertaining to the aforementioned and the Americans with Disabilities Act. For example, the commission is listed as a stakeholder for the Massachusetts Department of Transportation’s Cape Bridges Project advisory group. The commission is also tasked with filing a complaint with regulatory agencies if members observe something out of compliance.

In a joint meeting with the Select Board on Tuesday, January 6, the Planning Board appointed two new members. The Jonathan Bourne Public Library Building Committee was also formally appointed by the Select Board.

Civil engineer Amanda J. Holway was appointed to the Planning Board as a full member to fill an unexpired term ending this spring’s town election. Licensed real estate broker and real estate company owner Robert Frangieh was appointed to the board as an alternate member, a two-year position. Frangieh is also a member of the Housing Partnership Committee and serves as Bourne’s representative to the Cape Cod Commission.

Anne-Marie Siroonian, Carla Emmons, Todd Benedict, Irja Finn, Michael McGerigle, Tyler Butler and Elizabeth Balaschak were appointed by the Select Board to the Library Building Committee. The committee’s responsibilities include making “recommendations to the Select Board and Town Meeting regarding the design, siting, and construction of a new library at 19 Sandwich Road.”

To learn more about each group, visit its individual page on the town website or call Thut at 508-759-0600, extension 1307.

An application form can be found on the Town of Bourne website at bit.ly/townofbournetalentbankform , and can be emailed to kthut@bourne-ma.gov or dropped off at Town Hall. Vacancies can be filled at any point in the year. After an appointment period, those chosen to join will be sworn in and given a brief orientation.

“These are important tasks and affect the lives of all Bourne citizens,” Thut said. “All are welcome.”
