Title: Bourne Select Board Approves Additional Accessible Parking Spot At Community Center
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-15T13:30:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-select-board-approves-additional-accessible-parking-spot-at-community-center/article_0824e0ac-4a10-497d-a858-169224d2fa9d.html

Upon hearing requests for additional accessible parking spots at two town-owned properties at its meeting on July 7, the Bourne Select Board ultimately decided to have its policy subcommittee examine the town’s accessible parking regulations further.

“I think that there does need to be some consideration at the policy level about how to provide additional [accessible] parking spaces over the minimum requirement in a way that is not arbitrary,” Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem said.

“Will it apply to all town properties or are there only certain town properties you want to provide additional handicap-parking spots for? How do you determine how much more? Is it 10% more? Is it 30% more?” McCollem said. “Those are the types of policy-level decisions that you need to discuss so we can be fair and equitable across all of the properties.”

Town and state regulations stipulate the minimum number of accessible parking spaces a parking lot is required to have based on the parking lot’s size, as well as signage, loading zones, location, sidewalks and size.

Bourne Council on Aging (COA) Director Debora Oliviere requested that the board authorize adding one more accessible parking space to serve the front entrance of the Bourne Veterans Memorial Community Center in the wake of public feedback.

The property does have a total of eight accessible parking spots, which exceeds the minimum number of accessible parking spots required, Oliviere said.

However, noting that there are only four disabled parking spaces in front of the building, she said that entry to the center is now permitted only through the front entrance, emphasizing the need for an additional spot in front of the building. The other four spots are split evenly between the play area in the rear of the building and the courts.

“The community center serves a significant number of older adults and individuals with mobility limitations through a variety of health, wellness and social programs,” Oliviere said, noting that the additional accessible spot would “better meet the needs of our patrons” since the center is “a council on aging primarily during the day.”

With 120 parking spaces, the center exceeds the minimum requirement for five accessible parking spaces, as it currently offers eight, Bourne Building Commissioner Eleanor C. MacKay said, basing the calculation on the size of the lot, the use of the lot and the proximity of accessible spots to the area they are serving.

Oliviere pointed to the parking-spots-to-accessible-parking-spots ratio for other Cape Cod towns’ COA centers: “Sandwich has 92 spots with eight accessible spaces…Mashpee has 74 with eight. Barnstable has 133 with 12. Harwich has 160 with 12. Brewster has 58 with six.”

“It looks like most of these other senior centers have almost 10% of parking that is accessible parking,” Select Board clerk Mary Jane Mastrangelo noted. Bourne’s senior center sits at approximately 6.67%. “This access is a reasonable accommodation. I’m in favor of adding one,” she added.

In agreement that an additional accessible spot should be provided since the center’s sole entry is at the front of the building, Select Board member Jeanne L. Azarovitz emphasized the need for a policy discussion about how the town should allocate additional accessible-parking spots.

While Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian acknowledged the significance of the community center and its work supporting seniors in the community, she expressed concern about “what determines our decision to not adhere to policy,” since the center already provides more than the required number of accessible-parking spaces.

Noting the importance of following policy, Select Board member Peter J. Meier also recognized the need to address the community’s aging population and individuals with mobility issues, ultimately stating his support of authorizing the COA’s request for an additional accessible parking spot.

Both sentiments were echoed by Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti. While in agreement with Siroonian regarding the following policies given that the center exceeds the required amount of accessible parking spots, Ferretti noted, “I do agree, our senior center is probably a different scenario.”

Stating her support for allowing the center to add one more accessible parking spot, Ferretti emphasized the need to discuss how to address other requests for additional accessible spots by developing a policy to guide the board in reaching a decision.

Mastrangelo said the board should approve requests, such as for additional accessible-parking spots, based on a “demonstrated need of disability and meeting that need.”

“We don’t really have a written policy on handicap. We’re just following the rules… What’s our policy?” she asked. “I think it’s important to make reasonable accommodations when necessary.”

A motion made by Mastrangelo to approve the Council on Aging’s request for one more accessible-parking spot at the front of the senior center was seconded by Meier. The board voted to approve the motion 4-0-1 with Siroonian abstaining, citing policy.

McCollem said she would ask the Department of Public Works to provide the board with a plan outlining the schematics of the proposed work and estimated costs.

Siroonian’s motion to refer the discussion to the policy subcommittee to refine the town’s policy on the matter was seconded by Meier and approved by the board unanimously.

McCollem provided an update to the Select Board regarding ongoing efforts by the Town of Bourne to have the Department of Public Works install improvements, such as accessible parking signage and other identification to meet Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliance requirements at Taylor Point Marina in Buzzards Bay.

Citing MacKay’s review of the marina’s parking lot, McCollem noted that the lot is ADA-compliant in regard to the number of accessible parking spots it provides, as it exceeds the required minimum number of spaces of six. Of the 194 total parking spaces, eight are accessible.

Mastrangelo reiterated the significance of providing additional accessible parking in lots that already exceed the requirement. “This goes back to what I said about having reasonable accommodations for people with disabilities available upon request,” she said. “We had a situation where we were told last fall that there were three handicapped patrons on one slip at the marina… There were not enough spaces to meet the requirements of those permit holders who were paying for the marina.”

The board had been informed by the Commission on Disability about the various improvements that it recommended the town undertake to make the parking lot ADA compliant. Mastrangelo proposed that the board’s policy subcommittee continue to discuss the matter.

“How do we accommodate people with a disability who have a boat?” she asked.
