Title: Bourne Rings In 2026 With A True Polar Plunge
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-01-01T16:30:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-rings-in-2026-with-a-true-polar-plunge/article_0141dace-371f-4048-af12-f16f6fd15e84.html

Approximately 150 people began their new year plunging into 32°F water at Monument Beach on Thursday , January 1, for the 29th Annual Monument Beach Polar Plunge.

Hosted by the Monument Beach Polar Club (MBPC), the proceeds will be donated to the Bourne Food Pantry, which assists more than 400 families year-round. While promotional flyers describe the plunge as the “coldest 30 seconds of your life,” MBPC President Robert W. Bilodeau also considers it the club’s most profitable, with this year’s fundraising goal of meeting or beating last year’s total of $62,000.

Despite the weather conditions—snow, gusty winds and temperatures around 24°F, with a feels-like temperature of 12°F—a large crowd of people began to congregate as the snow began to lighten, with some wearing festive costumes.

“Coldest one in a few years,” said Bilodeau as he greeted participants at the registration table. He also mentioned other conditions, such as this year’s low tide. Diane Woodside, MBPC committee member, said that this year’s participants deserve “bragging rights” for committing to the plunge.

While the temperatures were freezing, the water was not frozen over unlike some previous plunges. Richard Tomlinson, 75, of Bourne, remembers how “one year it was iced over so we had to move it to Gray Gables.”

Tomlinson, who goes by the nickname “Red Dog,” has been plunging for the past 23 years. “Two of my friends started it, and they’ve passed away so I keep going,” he said, adding that it is “never a walk in the park. Low tide is the worst because you have to go out 20 feet, up to your knees, before you can dive.”

Among the veterans of the plunge were newcomers. Gabby Dussan, 14, of Bourne, has participated for the past two years. Gabby said she and Samantha Marshall, 13, prepared for the plunge by first warming up with a heated blanket.

Beth Dussan, 50, Gabby’s mother was there as a supporter. “We’re going to go eat some warm food after this,” she said. “And we’re going to turn up the heat.”

Six-year old Landon Bussiere of Bourne was also staying warm with a blanket, but said he was “scared."

As the countdown to noon began, the swimmers began their pre-plunge rituals, whether that was jumping in place, motivating themselves and others with positive support or staying bundled in their towels, blankets and jackets for as long as they could before shedding down to their swimsuits.

Some participants quickly dipped before running out, while others stayed in the water for minutes. Approximately 150 spectators watched and were ready with blankets and jackets for the swimmers to come out. Alex Scofield, 53, of Bourne said this year’s plunge was “awesome.”

“This is my 16th year doing it,” Scofield said as he was drying off, “We’ve lucked out for four straight years, five straight years... It’s been balmy for January 1.”

“I figured this was the real challenge. This is what puts polar in polar plunge,” he said.

Those who could not plunge in person had the option to participate remotely, through a variety of different means. The only requirements were to register, donate, document the plunge and send the evidence to MBPC.

The club’s flyer for the plunge suggested a few ideas: “dip into a cold bath … add a bucket of ice … take a kiddie pool plunge in your backyard … freeze your beard or hair … use Super Soakers … dump an iced beverage from your favorite coffee shop over your head … make swimsuit snow angels … have a winter water balloon fight ... douse yourself with a bucket of ice water … run through your sprinkler ...”

What started among a group of friends sitting around a campfire on New Year’s Eve 29 years ago has developed into an anticipated event. For the following two years after the plunge’s inception, the founding group continued to go swimming to celebrate the New Year, a tradition that began to spread through word of mouth. As the group began to grow, participants decided to pool together some money to donate to a local organization.

“After several suggestions were bantered about, the ‘founding members’ chose the Bourne Food Pantry and donated what was raised ($3,500),” said Woodside, “Our yearly contribution last year was $62,000…the year prior was $40,000…five years prior to that was $15,000.”

While the club receives donations in the weeks leading up to the plunge, the majority of the fundraising occurs the day of the plunge. Donations are accepted throughout the month of January.

Donations can continue to be made in the following ways: via Venmo to @MonumentBeach-PolarClub; by mailing a check to MBPC, c/o The Rose’s, 175 Shore Road, Bourne, MA 02532; or by contacting the Bourne Food Pantry and mentioning it is for the polar plunge.

Over the course of the past 29 years, the club’s operation has expanded to now 21 committee members, whose roles range from accounts receivable, guest services and maintenance to merchandising, communications and creative.

Support has come from outside the club as well, with social media and the support of three benefactors assisting in sharing the club’s efforts.

Twenty-three T-shirt sponsors have also covered “the costs of the T-shirts so the $25 [per person] registration donation can go straight to the pantry,” Woodside said.

In addition to fundraising for the food pantry via the plunge, the club has also established a yearly food drive in the summer to mark the “halfway” point to the next plunge. This past summer was the eighth annual drive.

The plunge finished around 12:15 PM, and swimmers were able to warm up with a free cup of chowder at the Weary Travelers Club at 77 Valley Bars Road. Like in years past, the MBPC will be hosting its annual potluck dinner dance on Saturday, January 31, beginning at 6 PM, at the club as well.

Featuring raffles, a silent auction and awards, commemorative T-shirts will be available for pickup. Tickets cost $5 per person or $20 per family, with proceeds also going to the pantry.

When asked what keeps the plunge so exciting and enjoyable every year, Bilodeau said, “it is a fun time seeing so many people… It is energizing on the beach that morning.”
