Title: Bourne Facing Budget Shortfalls
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-02-06T00:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-facing-budget-shortfalls/article_2a72c54e-d4c1-4ac0-9a9e-2c3d05c0418e.html

Despite unexpected expenses creating shortfalls and unknown variables for the Fiscal Year 2027 budget, the Bourne Select Board voted to send an unbalanced budget to the Finance Committee on January 27 and emphasized the importance of communication.

The Select Board voted to send the Finance Committee the FY27 budget with a change to the Fire Department’s county dispatch expenses of $296,798.41, creating a $70,125 shortfall. That expense increased 30.93% from FY26.

The Barnstable County dispatch, which the Bourne Fire Department uses to handle emergency calls for fire and EMS services, shared the final number with the town.

With other items changing in the budget, Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem suggested using a holistic rather than a narrowed approach to find sources to fund shortfalls.

The town has not received the FY27 cherry sheet, which is the “official notification to cities, towns and regional school districts of the next fiscal year’s state aid and assessments,” the Massachusetts Department of Revenue’s Municipal Finance Glossary states.

Referencing a preliminary cherry sheet, “the local aid proposal as it stands right now...would result in a budget deficit of approximately $350,000,” McCollem said.

The cherry sheet consists of a receipt side, which is “money that the town is getting from the state,” for example, Chapter 70 and Unrestricted General Government Aid (UGGA), and an assessment side, which is “the money that the state takes from the town,” she said.

“So money coming into the town budget [is] an increase of about $286,000. However…the estimated assessments to Bourne show an increase of about $636,000,” she said. “That’s what’s opening up this gap of about $350,000.” The main “drivers on the assessment side...on the expense side, are retired teacher health insurance, increased by about $166,000, School Choice cost increased by $36,000 and the charter school sending tuition increased by about $126,000.”

McCollem suggested scheduling a joint meeting with the School Committee, due to preliminary cherry sheets showing a net increase of 23 8th grade students who are planning on attending Upper Cape Cod Regional Technical School (UCT) rather than Bourne Public Schools, and the proposed Bourne School Department’s budget increase of $1,025,590.

“It might be educational for the Finance Committee and the School Committee and the Select Board to see, we’re revenue short here, and we need to figure out either by cutting expenses or hoping that revenues will come up higher,” Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo said.

McCollem said the towns and fire districts that use the county dispatch are “committed to establishing a finance committee to address what they’re seeing for the costs of running the service,” meaning the Town of Bourne will be able to discuss the increase.

She also said that Fire Chief David S. Pelonzi is aware that the increased costs are “problematic if they keep increasing at this rate…and they are looking to make some adjustments in their operations to make it more sustainable for [2028] and going forward,” however, these adjustments are “not necessarily going to be able to change anything for [2027].”

Mastrangelo suggested that it might be more cost-effective to have the dispatch in-house. Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian noted that salary and overtime costs have increased significantly.

Of the two police contracts, one has been settled and the other is still being negotiated. “Is there any provision right now for if the contract were settled, how we would pay for any changes?” Mastrangelo asked.

McCollem replied, “Right now, if the police contract settles in mediation next month, then I would come back to you and we would have this conversation again…with the impacts of the change and the shortfall that it would create and the gap it would create… There is no accounting in the proposed FY27 budget for those increases.”

Referencing speculation surrounding payment among the community, Mastrangelo aimed to clarify the situation: “We can’t pay them until the contract is settled… Even if the contract was settled and back pay is owed, then they would be paid that money.”

“That’s correct. When the contract is settled, the wages will be retroactive, but we cannot ask Town Meeting…to pay someone without a contract in place,” McCollem said.

McCollem asked for the Select Board’s opinion as to whether the board would like to transmit a balanced budget, informing the Finance Committee of the new information that would adjust the budget, or transmit an unbalanced budget, having changed it to reflect the new information, to the Finance Committee.

The charter does not require the Select Board to send a balanced budget to the Finance Committee, McCollem said.

Select Board member Peter J. Meier said the budget is “a fluid working document until we go to Town Meeting, so whatever we transmit, I don’t think it’s going to make that big of a difference.”

Mastrangelo proposed “to communicate the budget needs to the Finance Committee” when the town receives the numbers.

“I want to be upfront with the Finance Committee, and I want to be upfront with the public,” McCollem said. “My recommendation is to plug the changes on the expense side and give the Finance Committee sources and uses that show a shortfall.”

“I would agree with that... We’re going to have to balance it before we go to Town Meeting,” Mastrangelo said. “I just don’t think we should balance it now. I think we should say this is something we have to work on, through the budget process, together to come to a consensus on how to balance this budget.”

Select Board vice chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti and Select Board clerk Jeanne L. Azarovitz agreed.

As of Tuesday, February 3, the patrol union contract was still unsettled and the town was still waiting to receive final numbers for health insurance, Barnstable County retirement and cherry sheets. In light of the BANs sale, Finance Director Erica Flemming will also have to adjust the general and enterprise funds for short-term debt.

McCollem and Flemming were also informed on Tuesday by Upper Cape Regional Technical School Superintendent Roger Forget that, upon his review of the preliminary cherry sheets, the proposed budget for UCT is “approximately $380,000 short for FY27.”

It was also confirmed that “101 current 8th graders from Bourne have been accepted as part of the lottery that closed on January 5,” McCollem said, with 90% having accepted the offer so far and an additional second lottery occurring in the spring.

“I think this needs to be discussed with the impacts of that for the freshman class at the high school,” she said, noting she is working with Bourne Public Schools (BPS) superintendent Kerri Anne Quinlan-Zhou to schedule a joint meeting with the School Committee and Select Board. The rising number of freshmen does not affect the FY27 budget, but potentially the year after, she said.

“Their budget request on the town side is about…a 3.7% increase, and that is after all of the offsets that have been applied. So, the gross budget increase is higher than that,” McCollem said, adding that there are gaps in the budget that need to be discussed further. Noting that she had already defunded the vacant position of assistant town administrator, she also said that she has “taken a pretty sharp ax to shared costs.”

“None of us were expecting this,” McCollem said of UCT’s budget increase. “Big hit,” Siroonian said, with Ferretti agreeing.

Referencing the growing number of students who are going from Bourne Public Schools to UCT, Meier said, “When it starts affecting the overall budget, I think we need answers on why this is happening and see if we can correct it… Is Upper Cape doing that great of a job that everybody wants to go or is the Bourne Public Schools not doing that job and people are leaving?” Meier suggested the community could “put a cap out there saying ‘You take no more than this many students’ as a way of controlling the budget so we’re not hemorrhaging.”

“We need to be asking our school presentations to include enrollment so we know what the current enrollment is, and we can then know what the enrollment is that the budget is based on,” Mastrangelo said.

She also proposed discussing drafting a letter to Governor Maura T. Healey, state Representatives Steven G. Xiarhos (R-5th Barnstable) and David T. Vieira (R-3rd Barnstable), and state Senator Dylan A. Fernandes (D-Plymouth and Barnstable) to explain the proposed budgetary impacts on Bourne as a municipality and sending a copy to the Mass Municipal Association, which advocates for increasing funding for municipalities. Mastrangelo suggested having Forget and Quinlan-Zhou attend the same meeting to improve communication between the two school systems.

Siroonian and Ferretti both expressed disagreement with Meier’s comments on why students are going to UCT.

“I don’t feel that, honestly, our students are leaving because of any sort of malfunction at our school system,” Ferretti said, explaining that her granddaughter wants to attend UCT because she wants to take a trade to become a nurse, not because she does not like Bourne High School.

“Vocational schools right now are in a renaissance…for several reasons, none of which is because the other schools aren’t capable of providing an outstanding education,” Siroonian said, noting the Bourne school system’s 92% graduation rate and students attending Ivy League schools.

Meier said he is supportive of both schools but wanted to have a discussion on why students are attending UCT rather than Bourne High School.

“What is most important as our role as leaders in this community is the education of every child in the district, and how do we support that,” Siroonian said. “It doesn’t matter to me if they go to Bourne High School, if they go to Upper Cape Tech,..at the end of the day it’s about the children in Bourne and offering the best education for them.”

Meier said he agreed with Siroonian.

Forget confirmed with McCollem that he will be attending the Select Board’s meeting on Tuesday, March 3. Since Quinlan-Zhou is unable to attend that meeting, she asked if the board could attend the School Committee meeting on Wednesday, March 4. Both Forget and Quinlan-Zhou will be at the Finance Committee meeting on Monday, March 16.
