Title: Bourne Health Board Reviews Preliminary South Side Fire Station Septic Plan
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-03-27T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/bourne-health-board-reviews-preliminary-south-side-fire-station-septic-plan/article_b1d18190-8d69-4a9a-81d5-cdad24a4855d.html

The proposed septic system upgrade to support the development of the south side fire station at 171 Clay Pond Road underwent a preliminary concept review at the Bourne Board of Health’s meeting on March 25, during which questions were raised about the proposed septic system’s design flow and technology and associated costs.

Next, a finalized plan will be submitted to the town Health Department for administrative review. Health Director Kaitlyn Shea said, “A septic installer that is contracted with the town would have to submit a permit.”

Richard W. Pomroy of Pomroy Associates LLC, the project’s operating manager, said that having received the approval of the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Appeals, the next step is to meet with the Board of Health to review the system. He added that the goal is to go to bid for the project in “probably the next month or so.”

The new fire station is proposed to be located in a Natural Resource Nitrogen Sensitive Area. This designation requires that the Best Available Nitrogen Reducing Technology (BANRT) be installed in the septic system.

Matthew Collins of Pare Corporations, the project’s engineer, said the Nitrex system was chosen because “it’s really the only and the best, I would say, from the MassDEP [Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection] qualifications, to provide nitrogen reduction without a blower,” which he added is a criterion of the project.

Pio S. Lombardo of Lombardo Associates, Inc., an environmental consulting and engineering firm specializing in wastewater treatment, subcontracted to design the system for the new fire station, said he has been engineering the Nitrex system for 25 years. He added that the Massachusetts Alternative Septic System Test Center (MASSTC) has tested and monitored the system.

Health Board member William “Dusty” Meier asked if Nitrex has been applied commercially. Lombardo said it has and provided examples of its various implementations. Meier asked if a certain amount of influent is required for the system to run properly.

Lombardo said it does not. Compared to the activated sludge treatment system, which requires a “dose” of “fresh wastewater that has the bugs in it,” the Nitrex system utilizes the fixed film treatment technique, where the “bugs grow and attach themselves to the media in the treatment system. They grow and die as the food supply, if you will.”

Set at 905 gallons per day (gpd), the system’s design flow is the maximum estimated daily volume of wastewater the system is able to handle. Lombardo noted that the number was provided to him by Pare Corporation. He said the system is designed to handle high- and low-use conditions.

Health Board member Donald J. “DJ” Ellis asked about the potential impacts of contaminants being introduced to the septic system. Citing his experience in the hazardous waste industry, Lombardo said, “It’s hard to say anything with affinity… We have no reason to think that the material shouldn’t be processed by the treatment system and it operates,” adding that permanent damage is “highly unlikely” and “there’s nothing that would occur that could not be remedied.”

Ellis asked if Lombardo would monitor the system to ensure it is viable. Lombardo said the system’s “objective is to treat wastewater to make sure that it’s pathogenically clean” and that “the nitrogen is removed to below 10 milligrams per year,” which is the design criteria.

Meier said he was worried about a situation in which the fire station would need to be closed if the system backs up. Lombardo said the “system should never be down to the point that it cannot process the water going through it,” noting the system has duplex pumps and is required to have two independent sources of power.

Lombardo said his company remotely monitors for “catastrophic” events, such as a line being plugged, and an alarm would notify the operators to respond. The operations and maintenance manual outlines the various alarms, as well as how to and how long operators have to fix the issue.

“There’s nothing that is five minutes,” Lombardo said of the response time, “I wouldn’t be surprised if the shortest one is a day.”

Citing his knowledge of a sewer treatment operator who operated multiple plants from his cellphone, Meier asked if it is required that the system have an operator. Lombardo replied that it is a requirement to have an operations and maintenance agreement with “an entity that is qualified to do the routine and emergency response.”

“The operator has to go to the site more often to collect samples, to bring them to the lab to demonstrate that it’s working the way it’s supposed to, then for maintenance work on the equipment,” Lombardo said, adding that the operator would be there “twice a year; they do not need to be there that often.”

Health Board chairman Robert D. Collet asked Lombardo for a rough estimate of the number of contractors who could bid to operate the system. “Not a lot,” Lombardo said. “That’s why we’ve engineered these things to be as automated as possible.”

“We take the projects all the way from the beginning, all the way to the end. And the end being operation maintenance,” he added. “A lot of things that need to be done, we can do from our office.”

Meier said he “sees a cost factor that never goes away” with the proposed system, which he contrasted with a standardized innovative/alternative (I/A) septic system that is tested only “every couple of years.”

Every I/A system is required to sample, Lombardo said. The only difference between other I/A systems and the Nitrex is that, since it is a provisional system, the Nitrex system would be sampled quarterly during its first three years of operation. Thereafter, sampling would occur twice a year, he said.

Meier said he is worried that the fire station does not require a system with such a high-use capacity. Lombardo said the system is “scaled according to the demands of its use,” adding that it takes into account the high levels of nitrogen in the wastewater.

The system is ventilated either through the station’s vents or into the drain field, Lombardo said as he explained the septic system’s specifications. He added that the computer that runs and monitors the system is located in the operations room.

Collet asked whether there are other BANRTs that are “simpler or more easily maintained systems and still achieve nitrogen reduction.” Lombardo said that while there are other alternatives that also decrease the nitrogen levels, “nobody does any better.”

Health Board vice chairwoman Margaret Reali asked why commercial I/A systems remain provisional and are not yet general-use certified if they are as capable as Lombardo is describing. “I’ve asked the same question, too,” Lombardo said.

“We were selected to engineer and provide this system,” Lombardo said, reiterating that the location of the fire station requires BANRT, of which Nitrex is one. It is “reassuring to folks, but I’m not impressed with it,” he said of general-use certification. “At the end of the day, does the system work and is it cost-effective to get the job done?”

Noting the discussion around the use of different technologies, Pomroy said that in light of Chapter 149 and municipal statutes, the system is “modeled after the nitric system, but it’s open-ended to other systems that meet local and state regulations, provided that they meet them and our requirements.”

“We, by law, have to provide more than one manufacturer for any system that goes into the project specifications,” he added, “There could be equals that are submitted by the contractors that are at the discretion during and after the bidding process; we’re not locked in.”

Collet asked why the design flow was set at 905 gpd, which he interpreted as high for the building’s system. Lombardo explained that during the design process, the maximum conditions must be accounted for. The 665 gpd is the average flow for the proposed system, he added.

Citing that the Bourne Fire Department’s headquarters, which is the largest station, has a design flow of 683 gpd and that the proposed south side fire station will be smaller, Shea asked if the cost of the design flow of 905 gpd creates an increase in taxes that is not necessary.

The calculations used for the design flow are “standard,” Lombardo said. “It would be malpractice to have it be much lower.”

Ellis reiterated Shea’s question, asking if there is a difference in cost between a design flow of 683 gpd versus 905 gpd. The systems come in incremental sizes, Lombardo said, adding that changing the flow by 100 gpd would not significantly affect the system’s size. He is sensitive to cost, he said.

In response to Collet’s question about whether there would be a difference in design flows in terms of maintenance, Lombardo said the proposed Nitrex system requires the least maintenance.

He reiterated that the design flow calculation is standard and based on the number of people who will occupy the fire station. Pomroy added that the south side fire station will have a higher capacity than a substation, as it was designed to handle growth in the community and will be used for mutual aid and backup coverage.

“There is no reason to think it is not going to be cost-competitive,” Lombardo said. “We’re not being elaborate here…there’s no gold plating. What you are getting is a high-quality system that produces the best nitrogen removal.” Collet said he was appreciative of the work and explained that his line of questioning was to obtain information for the residents of Bourne.

Lombardo reiterated that how the system is designed is required and “anything less than this is negligence, in my professional opinion, and I do not say that lightly.”

“The purview of the Board of Health is not whether it saves money or not… That is [why] we have the Board of Selectmen…they make that decision,” health board clerk Miguel Prieto said, adding that as a health board member his responsibility is to “make sure that it achieves and meets what the requirements are; it does.”

“Now, does it do that efficiently or not? I do not know,” he added.

The Board of Health needs “to weigh the environmental costs associated with what is proposed,” Shea said, adding that the purpose of Title 5 and local Board of Health regulations is to “maintain the environmental integrity of the location.”

Prieto said that because it is a provisional system, it has not been proven that it is going to protect the environment since it is “not a mature technology that is established.”

Since the MASSTC reviews I/A system plans free of cost for towns, Shea said, she sent the proposed septic system plans to George Heufelder, a project specialist at MASSTC, but has not heard back yet.
