Title: Chapoquoit Yacht Club Launches Collaborations
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-22T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/chapoquoit-yacht-club-launches-collaborations/article_95786ba9-1f5f-443f-be4b-478fc2f74002.html

The Chapoquoit Yacht Club (CYC) has set sail on a new journey in its 123-year history.

Recent changes at the yacht club have provided more opportunities to collaborate with the community, including the West Falmouth library and students at Upper Cape Cod Regional Technical High School (UCT).

After the CYC and the Chapoquoit Associates, the governing body of Chapoquoit Island, adjourned their partnership through which the yacht club leased property from the association for its operations, the CYC left its traditional home on the island.

“Having an embedded yacht club or sailing club with a robust junior program didn’t really match with the changing demographics of the island... The only course of action was to move off and establish ourselves in what we feel is actually more central to the West Falmouth community,” CYC board chairman Michael Jackson Jr. said of the club’s move to the town dock at West Falmouth Harbor.

While planning its move off the island, CYC was also converting from operating as a private yacht club into a nonprofit educational organization at the end of 2024.

These changes have allowed for “direct public access” to the club’s fleet on the harbor for its community sailing programs, whereas before the club was operating privately within a private housing association, Jackson said.

“Chapoquoit Yacht Club was a private club and so it offered access, but it was selective access to the harbor, and as the whole coastline gentrifies, the harbors around Falmouth are getting more and more difficult to access, except for through community sailing,” Jackson noted, emphasizing the significance of CYC’s new status as a non-profit, educational organization with open membership.

The plan is for the club’s sailing operation to be located in the harbor’s South Cove, with its Optimists and 420s located atop three stand-alone floats, which are fastened to separate moorings, and its Beetlecats connected to their individual moorings.

CYC had received approval for the plan from the Falmouth harbormaster, which had been pending until a public hearing on environmental impact by the Conservation Commission allowed the club to move forward. “We’ve cleared all of our permits with the Conservation Commission hearing,” Jackson said, adding that the club received “a permit to go ahead and get the floats installed.”

Last summer was the first time since World War II that the club could not offer its junior sailing program, since “it did not have a place to operate the boats from,” however, Jackson shared, the Wild Harbor and Quissett yacht clubs temporarily hosted the CYC’s junior program for the summer.

Having heard from other sailing organizations about their partnerships with UCT students and instructors building equipment, Jackson shared how John York of Cataumet introduced CYC to UCT in order to build the floats.

“These projects are great because the students are involved with the planning, take-off (material estimate) and layout of the floats,” said Nolan LeRoy, UCT’s director of vocational programs and cooperative education coordinator. CYC funded and ordered materials, shipping the items to UCT to start construction. He added that students worked with their carpentry instructor, Wilbur LaVoie, and CYC members on the design-build process for the floats.

LeRoy added that this project was “an offshoot of the ongoing work” that UCT does with the Town of Falmouth’s Harbormaster’s office to build replacement floats for the town’s marinas over the past couple of years.

Two of the three planned floats will be operational for this summer, with the third being built next spring. The two floats will be in the water by the third week of June since the club’s sailing program begins on June 26.

In addition to offering sailing lessons, the club seeks to offer additional programs. Describing West Falmouth Library as the “core” of the West Falmouth community, Jackson shared how the club’s partnership with the library is building off existing collaboration.

Through the Sail Through Summer series, which will be held at the West Falmouth Library located at 575 West Falmouth Highway, the library and CYC will host gatherings, such as touch-a-boat day, classes about seamanship, knot-tying, rigging, ecology, animals and the health of the harbor, boat safety courses, movies and more.

As “neighbors” in the West Falmouth community, the library and CYC “started to talk about how we could partner to serve children in our community, especially with the yacht club’s renewed focus on community outreach and becoming more widely available to the community,” said Molly Akin, the executive director of West Falmouth Library. She added that Rebecca Kanaley, the library’s youth services and communities programs manager, had worked closely with CYC members to develop programs over the past year.

Between CYC’s broadening mission to address the fact that “we are in an ocean-side community, and not all children in our community currently have access to the water or to sailing instruction” and the library’s mission “to reach all children through literacy,” Akin said, “there’s a nice complementary overlap.”

“It’s been an amazing team effort by a lot of people across the club,” Jackson said, reflecting on the club’s efforts, also adding how other local community members have supported the club’s new partnerships.

For more information about the club, visit chapoquoityachtclub.com .
