Title: Community Input Emphasized In Replacement Of Bourne, Sagamore Bridges
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-06-12T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/community-input-emphasized-in-replacement-of-bourne-sagamore-bridges/article_f7fa7ed5-8b23-4bb9-a5b0-b0413c6a8bb0.html

The Cape Cod Bridges Project Advisory Group gathered at the Massachusetts Maritime Academy campus on Tuesday to share project updates and next steps, and to provide an opportunity for discussion that focused primarily on facilitating dialogue and promoting community involvement.

Established by the Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) to promote communication and collect local feedback regarding the replacement of the Bourne and Sagamore bridges, the group is composed of stakeholder organizations, civic groups, and local, regional, state and federal government entities.

Luisa Paiewonsky, MassDOT’s executive director of megaprojects, shared updates that have occurred since the group’s last meeting on March 10.

Currently in Phase Two of the design-build procurement process, Paiewonsky said that after MassDOT issued a request for letters of interest on March 28, approximately 99 construction and design firms attended an industry day event to learn more about the project.

“We think this is going to lead to a very vigorous competition, which is good for pricing and quality of the proposals,” she said.

After the letters of interest were due on May 27, MassDOT issued a request for qualifications on May 29. Interested firms will have until Tuesday, July 28, to submit a statement of qualifications outlining and demonstrating their abilities to complete the project.

MassDOT will then examine the qualifications of the interested firms over the course of the summer. Firms will be notified around September 11.

“We will winnow down the list of those responding to three to five teams, and invite those teams to respond to our request for proposals” on September 17, Paiewonsky said.

This will lead to the “final stage,” which will “result in our issuing a notice to proceed, to start construction,” she added. “We expect issuing that notice in the fall of 2027.”

Paiewonsky noted that the contract with whoever is selected will include “requirements” that “provide financial incentives for finishing early and financial penalties for finishing late.”

Steven Tupper, representing the Cape Cod Metropolitan Planning Organization on the advisory group, asked Paiewonsky about MassDOT’s plans to share information about the procurement process.

Paiewonsky said that while there are aspects of the process that must remain confidential to ensure that the procurement process is done competitively and equitably, MassDOT plans to share with the advisory group the “maximum amount of information that we’re able to.”

She added that MassDOT’s aim is to be transparent with the public about the process so people can understand the timeline. “We truly think the project is better the more the public knows about it,” she said.

Paiewonsky shared some developments with the environmental permitting process. Regarding both the state and federal environmental permitting processes, environmental impact reports have been submitted.

While MassDOT received approval from the state’s secretary of energy and environmental affairs, it is still awaiting approval from the Federal Highway Administration, with Paiewonsky saying that she is “hoping to get that approved by the end of this month.” These approvals allow for the remainder of the environmental permitting process to continue.

In regard to design, the preliminary roadway submittals for both bridges and the preliminary structural submittal for the Sagamore Bridge have been completed, with the Bourne Bridge’s structural submittal being reviewed by MassDOT.

Pointing to the US Army Corps of Engineers, owners of both the Sagamore and Bourne bridges, and its announcement on May 26 in which it offered the bridges up for “adoption” to anyone willing to cover the cost to relocate and continue to maintain them, Paiewonsky said that as of Monday there has not been any applicants, with a deadline of Friday, June 26, to apply.

“In all likelihood, we will be demolishing the Sagamore Bridge during this upcoming construction phase,” Paiewonsky said. “We will preserve historic elements, including the plaques.”

She also acknowledged ongoing collaboration with the Town of Bourne to identify solutions to certain locations that will be impacted by the construction of the bridges.

Paiewonsky noted that, regarding Keith Field, associated parking and the bike pathway there, MassDOT is working with the town to address community concerns and feedback.

Another community impact was brought to MassDOT’s attention during a recent Bourne Conservation Commission meeting, at which residents and the police chief provided feedback on MassDOT’s closure of approximately a quarter-mile of the Canal Service Road under the Sagamore Bridge on the mainland side for safety during construction. “It’s simply not safe to have any unauthorized pedestrian, bicycle, fishermen, any kind of nonauthorized access to the construction zone,” Paiewonsky said.

Acknowledging that in addition to the road’s primary use by the US Army Corps of Engineers, the road is used for emergency responses to circumvent traffic on Scenic Highway, recreationally and for commuting, Paiewonsky said that MassDOT is proposing “a detour around the construction zone.”

MassDOT is developing a “concept to move people around from Canal Service Road around the construction zone and then back onto the service road,” which will be presented at a public hearing on Thursday, July 23, at 6 PM at Bourne High School, Paiewonsky said. Other project aspects will be discussed as well.

Peter J. Meier, a Bourne Select Board representative on the advisory group, inquired about providing the Bourne Conservation Commission with information about MassDOT’s concept plan.

“The fact that this occurred at a Conservation Commission meeting doesn’t indicate our acceptance that this is under the jurisdiction of the Conservation Commission. We have indicated that this is not a wetlands protection issue,” Paiewonsky replied. “We anticipate working with the Select Board, the Police Department and the town administrator’s office.”

However, she added that MassDOT is appreciative of the Conservation Commission bringing the community’s perspective about the partial closure of the Canal Service Road under the Sagamore Bridge to its attention.

Anne-Marie Siroonian, also representing the Bourne Select Board on the advisory group, emphasized the need for a memorandum of understanding (MOU) between the Town of Bourne and MassDOT. “I think it is important for us to kind of start establishing some kind of formal process to build that understanding,” Siroonian said, adding that this will clarify expectations and responsibilities between the two entities.

She added that Bourne residents have advocated for an MOU, citing that Melissa Murner and her son, Peter Murner, have been attending several town meetings and other forums to speak on the matter.

Paiewonsky said MassDOT will also meet with the Cape and Island Municipal Leadership Association on Friday, June 12, and the Historical Society of Santuit and Cotuit on Thursday, June 18.

Emphasizing the importance of community involvement, Paiewonsky said, “The more people know, the better for us.”

Audience members Stephen Buckley of Chatham and John York of Cataumet both stated the need for improved communication with the public about meetings, deadlines and other aspects associated with the project. Paiewonsky acknowledged that MassDOT “can do better” and “take responsibility.”

Kenneth A. Cheitlin, representing the Bourne Town Administrator’s Advisory Committee on Pedestrian and Bicycle Pathways, inquired about MassDOT’s perspective on developing a new rail line to the region and in Bourne, especially in light of the other infrastructure projects in the region.

Paiewonsky noted that this proposal was also mentioned by state Senator Dylan A. Fernandes (D-Plymouth and Barnstable) and state Representative Steven G. Xiarhos (R-5th Barnstable) at a meeting with interim Secretary of Transportation Phillip Eng earlier that morning.

“I can say with relative certainty that [a new rail line] would not be part of the Cape Cod Bridges project, only because we are so far down the road that adding a major component that is not funded right now would throw open the design, the permitting, potentially right of way,” Paiewonsky said. However, she did note that Eng said he heard Fernandes’ and Xiarhos’ proposal and would bring it to his office of transportation planning.

The next Cape Cod Bridges Project Advisory Group meeting is scheduled for September 8.

For more information about the project, visit www.mass.gov/cape-cod-bridges-program.
