Title: Demolition Of Sagamore Beach Home Approved By Bourne Historical Commission
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-15T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/demolition-of-sagamore-beach-home-approved-by-bourne-historical-commission/article_b91e0365-849c-43df-adb0-209ba7181b95.html

The Bourne Historical Commission has approved the proposed demolition of a house at 210 Old Plymouth Road in Sagamore Beach. Town records show the home was built in 1948.

Michael Sorenti, the owner of the property, and Angela and Michael Cafua, contractors for the project, presented before the commission at its meeting on Tuesday , May 12, to request approval to demolish the house.

There are two houses on the property, with one built in 1948 and the other in 1970—both are planned to be demolished. Since the house built in 1948 is 78 years old, the commission’s approval was necessary under the town bylaw because the home is more than 75 years old.

Section 3.14.1 of the town bylaw is in effect to “preserve and protect historically significant buildings within the Town of Bourne that reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, economic, political or social history of the Town.”

The bylaw further defines a significant building as “any building or portion thereof which in whole or in part is more than seventy-five (75) years old or is listed in the historical survey of the Town of Bourne and on file with the Bourne Historical Commission.”

“They are both rundown. I don’t think they have any historical value,” Sorenti stated.

Angela Cafua noted that the property had “been in the same family since the ‘80s, and they don’t have any information on any historical significance.”

In regard to future intentions, Sorenti added that “I don’t have any plans to build on it,” noting that he may, depending on his children, bestow them the property. “I’m helping them out, just instead of leaving it there,” he said of demolishing the rundown houses.

Committee member John S. Harrington inquired whether the foundation will be removed, to which Sorenti replied that: “foundation, septic system—everything’s being stripped. I’m going to back-fill everything.”

Abutting neighbor Beverley Savage stated her concern regarding the impact of the demolition on the neighborhood. The demolition would increase the neighborhood’s value, Angela Cafua said, citing the “dilapidated” nature of the building, adding that since there are no plans to rebuild at this moment, the property would become open space.

In response to Savage’s inquiry about what would potentially be built on the property in the future, Sorenti reiterated that he bought it for his children. “There’s 2.5 acres there if they want to build,” he said. He added that an alternative may be that “the kids say they don’t want it, and I sell it.”

The commission members unanimously approved a motion to accept the demolition of the building.
