Title: Elevated Bacteria Levels Close Patuisset Beach
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-06-26T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/elevated-bacteria-levels-close-patuisset-beach/article_353f9c8f-91de-4617-8bf8-82bf13965ee5.html

Routine weekly testing on June 19 revealed an elevated presence of fecal coliform bacteria at Patuisset Beach, resulting in the beach’s closure.

Patuisset Beach, which overlooks Hen Cove in Pocasset, is “temporarily closed for swimming and water activities,” as it “may cause illness,” the Bourne Health Department posted in a notice on June 19. “The beach will be reopened as soon as it is deemed safe.”

The water has been tested daily since the excessive levels of bacteria were first detected, Bourne Health Department Assistant Director Stacey Burgess said on Wednesday , June 24 . Testing done on Wednesday revealed that the water was still not safe to enter. As of the afternoon on Thursday, June 25, no updates on the water quality were announced.

The daily tests primarily look at two values: the number of bacteria and the geometric mean. Also referred to as geo-mean, it “is calculated using the five most recent samples and is intended to reflect typical conditions,” the Massachusetts Department of Public Health website states.

When the value of the geo-mean exceeds the standard value, it is considered a warning sign of high bacteria levels, the state’s website said. Burgess stated that the geo-mean value at the site needs to decrease, which could “take a few days.”

“Avoid swimming, wading or any other water conduct activities in the affected area,” and “follow all posted signs and instructions from local authorities,” the town’s notice reads.

With the beach being closed until further notice, information and potential updates about the water quality can be found by visiting the Town of Bourne website or by calling the Health Department.

Beach closures due to elevated bacteria levels can also be observed at the state’s Department of Health website at mass.gov/info-details/interactive-beach-water-quality-dashboard .
