Title: Empty Seats On Bourne Police Roof Building Committee Causes Discussion
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-04-17T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/empty-seats-on-bourne-police-roof-building-committee-causes-discussion/article_741b28e4-409a-444a-bae0-15f8d97d0e1d.html

The three specialized seats on the Police Station Roof Building Committee remained unseated heading into the Select Board’s meeting on Tuesday , April 14 . To address this, Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem sought to have a discussion with the board about whether it would want to fill the vacant seats itself.

“Even if it is aggressive, my question is, does the Select Board want to serve as the building committee with the other members who are identified, so we can get a designer on board and we can at least make the attempt to salvage the fall construction season?” McCollem asked.

Built in 2019, the new police station had a list of defects in its short lifetime: leaks, improper ventilation and failing plumbing, among others. The town has since sued both M. O’Connor Inc., the contractor, and Kaestle Boos Associates, the architect, who were given charge of the project, for damages; the suit is still ongoing. At Special Town Meeting in October, residents voted in favor of fixing the leaking roof now rather than later, given concerns that those issues would worsen in the intervening years before an eventual settlement.

The Select Board formed the Police Station Roof Building Committee to oversee the project. Finance Committee member Thomas Joyce, Capital Outlay Committee at-large member Bruce R. McNamee and Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo have each been appointed to serve as representatives of their respective groups on the committee, alongside Police Chief Brandon M. Esip.

In response to McCollem’s proposal, Select Board clerk Jeanne L. Azarovitz noted that although “it is kind of scary” due to the board members’ other responsibilities, “I think we should try and make this work.”

Noting the history of the project and the lack of applications by the public to fill the vacant committee seats, Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian said, “I am not opposed to trying to take this on,” adding that “we should absolutely try to get this underway ASAP.”

Echoing Azarovitz’s concern about the board members’ time constraints, Siroonian suggested that a quorum of Select Board members could meet with the other building committee members.

Mastrangelo stated that she was “hesitant to go in this direction,” and suggested advertising the seats at the upcoming May Town Meeting, noting the interest that the project had at Fall Town Meeting. “We need members with expertise,” she said.

Citing the lack of interest in both the building committee and the charter review committee, Mastrangelo added, “I am a bit troubled about the fact that the people in Bourne are not showing interest in serving on committees.”

“Desperate times require desperate measures,” Select Board member Peter J. Meier said, adding that while this is not the norm for the board, he does not want to “stall this much longer because we have waited” because “the longer it goes, the more expensive it is going to be and potentially add more damage to the building.”

Understanding Mastrangelo’s position, Meier proposed that in the interim, the Select Board temporarily serve on the building committee until the three specialized seats are filled, as a compromise.

“This is an important effort. We really need to get moving on it,” Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti said, agreeing with the other board members’ comments. “This building is not going to heal itself,” she added.

The board voted 4-1-0, with Mastrangelo the sole dissenting vote, to have the Select Board serve on the Police Station Roof Building Committee in the interim, with the intention to pursue filling the three specialized seats with interested applicants.
