Title: Federal, State And County Delegation Addresses Bourne Select Board
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-15T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/federal-state-and-county-delegation-addresses-bourne-select-board/article_7c19df34-6b04-49ba-970b-9202c847631b.html

The Select Board invited its federal, state and county delegation to speak at its meeting on Tuesday , May 12, regarding ongoing efforts and issues related to the Town of Bourne. Several members of the delegation were present and discussed a variety of topics, including funding, roads and bridges infrastructure, schools, municipalities, county resources and services, and legislative updates.

Michael Jackman, district director for US Representative William R. Keating (D-9th District), spoke on Keating’s behalf, as the congressman was in Washington, DC, at the time.

He said Keating’s main focus is the Cape Cod Canal bridges. Noting the various advisory, informational and public meetings held regarding the project, Jackman said Keating would also participate in such events should the Town of Bourne wish to do so.

While Jackman said the project’s construction has been progressing, he noted that the Bourne Bridge replacement is still unfunded.

Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian voiced her hope that both the federal and state legislators “understand the magnitude and impact that this bridge will have on this community” and that “we need to know that when we pick up the phone, and it’s an SOS, that everybody has our back.”

“Congressman Keating is a resident of Bourne. He goes over that bridge pretty much every day when he’s not in DC, so he knows why it is not just a community connection, it’s a public safety connection, public health connection, it’s an economic connection—they’re vital,” Jackman said.

Jackman talked about the Surface Transportation Reauthorization, a federal program for highways, highway safety, transit and rail that provides funds to states for infrastructure projects over a five-year cycle.

With the current reauthorization cycle ending in September, the House’s Transportation and Infrastructure Subcommittee has been finalizing the language for the next cycle, he said.

Keating has been advocating that the language include the Bridge Investment program, the Mega Grant Program and the Nationally Significant Multimodal Freight and Highway Projects (INFRA) to fund the Bourne Bridge replacement project, Jackman said. He added that the latter two grant programs are currently being used to fund the replacement project for the Sagamore Bridge.

“There’s bipartisan support for that because every district, whether you are a red state or a blue state, you need a bridge…and you need bridges to be replaced,” Jackman said, adding that Keating is also advocating for protecting INFRA, the Mega Grant Program and Bridge Investment Program (BIP) from cuts and increasing the funding for the aforementioned programs for the new Surface Transportation Reauthorization cycle.

Jackman also said that the congressman is supporting the inclusion of the low-lying roads and bridges grant program in the reauthorization as well. A discretionary program, it funds the improvement or replacement of coastal, low-lying bridges, which, Jackman noted, are impacted by climate change and the increased amount and severity of storms.

“We are very hopeful that something will be coming very soon,” Jackman said.

Jackman also talked about other funding sources, such as community project funding for the decarbonization program, which is connected to the Massachusetts Maritime Academy’s (MMA) geothermal heat pump system project, and an engine room full-mission simulator for MMA.

Jackman said Keating secured funding for building the Barnstable County Children’s Cove facility, a child advocacy center. He noted that Keating has been working to secure funding for the Cape Coastal Community Composting Facility on Joint Base Cape Cod.

Next up was state Senator Dylan A. Fernandes (D-Plymouth and Barnstable), who provided updates ranging from the bridges replacement project to legislative budget amendments and bills to the Seasonal Community designation.

Regarding the Cape Cod bridges replacement project, Fernandes said that organizing the quarterly Cape Cod community bridges forum has allowed local residents to learn about the project and ask questions of Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) officials, and that he plans to continue holding the series.

Citing the severe traffic over the past couple of weeks due to repairs to the Bourne Bridge, Fernandes said that he had called and written a letter to the US Army Corps of Engineers to discuss possible changes to traffic patterns to improve flow.

Fernandes said the Seasonal Community designation was extended to include the entirety of Cape Cod for every town to choose to opt in to the program. When the program was first rolled out, the Upper Cape and part of the mid-Cape were not able to do so. He noted that it would expand access to and affordability of housing by lowering residential property taxes.

Fernandes said the Senate budget, scheduled to be discussed next week at the State House, increases local aid based on per-capita calculations.

“Bourne will be seeing an 8.8% [increase] if this funding gets reconciled. We are certainly going to pass it on the Senate side,” he added.

He also noted efforts to reform the formula used to calculate local aid through an amendment to calculate it on a per-capita basis, making it more reflective of the town’s current needs, as he considers the older Unrestricted General Government Aid (UGGA) formula antiquated.

Fernandes also noted filing an amendment to create a UGGA commission to examine the local aid funding system.

Among other items that have been funded is the Student Opportunity Act. Fernandes also said that he filed an amendment to establish commissions to analyze Chapter 70, which is state funding for education, and the foundation budget.

He said he hopes to include a discussion of transportation costs in the budget review as well.

Other legislative funding that Fernandes secured for the Town of Bourne aims to improve water quality, roads and bridges. He also noted assisting the town in supporting two home-rule petitions through the state Senate.

Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo took the opportunity to caution Fernandes regarding the amendment to the State Revolving Fund Financial Assistance Program that “might give more preference to affordable housing.

“I understand the reason for doing that, but I just want to caution you that the Cape is still facing so much in terms of wastewater and is alone in its [Nitrogen Sensitive Areas] designations that really make us take a lot of financial burden.” Mastrangelo added that she would like to continue communication on that matter as it moves through the legislative process.

Taking Mastrangelo’s comment into account, Fernandes replied that the Cape and Islands Water Protection Fund has totaled to a “little more than $30 million a year now” for water-quality projects in the area.

State Representative David T. Vieira (R-3rd Barnstable) was the next member of the state legislative delegation to speak.

Circling back to the discussion about the amendment to the SRF, Vieira said that he “does not think it is necessary in the SRF regulatory atmosphere.” He noted that the Association to Preserve Cape Cod’s concern was similar to Mastrangelo’s.

In a different vein, Vieira said that in a collaborative effort with Fernandes, he has attempted to contact the US Army Corps of Engineers regarding improving the traffic flow at the Bourne Bridge during construction through adjustments to the traffic pattern, reiterating that he had not received a response since doing so.

Pivoting to sharing legislative updates, Vieira first shared that the House has included military impact aid in its budget. He said four local bills were included in the current session for Bourne.

The first is emergency legislation to have Governor Maura T. Healey validate a previously invalidated town election vote, allowing the town to move forward with borrowing $18.8 million for the south side fire station project.

The second is that Chapter 26 of the Acts of 2025 was passed, which granted easements to the Town of Bourne in relation to waterline installation, repair and maintenance.

The latter two bills are still in the State House, not yet passed. Bill H4992 would be an act conveying the land at the old county hospital to the Bourne. Bill H5084 is the special legislation for an alcohol license for Cataumet Fish.

Noting that there had been discussion about the transferability language regarding the license, Vieira said that the State House has received Town Counsel Bryan F. Bertram’s edits, as authorized by the Select Board, and “we’re going to get that cleaned up for you, so that it’s tight.”

Vieira said a bill providing refundable tax credits for septic systems for primary homes is making its way through the House, having received “favorable” reviews from the Revenue Committee.

Focusing on the bridges, board clerk Jeanne L. Azarovitz expressed her appreciation for Vieira’s efforts to reach out to the US Army Corps of Engineers. However, she noted the importance of better communication between the US Army Corps of Engineers and the legislators, citing public safety and traffic flow, especially in the case of an evacuation.

State Representative Steven G. Xiarhos (R-5th Barnstable) was the last of the state legislators to speak.

In regard to bridge repair and replacement, Xiarhos said that he and the other legislators will work to continue improving communication with the US Army Corps of Engineers. “We’re on the phone with MassDOT all the time, so if you need something, please come to me,” he added.

Citing his personal and professional experience, Xiarhos emphasized the importance of public safety and his support for law enforcement.

He said Bourne’s annual dog blood drive, which is organized by Cape Cod Veterinary Specialists at the Bourne Police Department, is conducted in honor of Yarmouth Police Sergeant Sean Gannon, who was killed in the line of duty, and his K9, Nero, who survived the incident.

Xiarhos noted the ongoing efforts to replace the Scusset Beach fishing pier located in Sagamore Beach, as well as efforts to ensure that, amid the bridges replacement project, people are still able to cross the canal, whether by walking, biking or driving.

He also advocated for the audit of the State House to be done by the State Auditor Diana DiZoglio, which 72% of Massachusetts voters voted to authorize, as well as amending the right to shelter law to lower financial strain and increasing funding for Bourne schools, roads and bridges.

The last person to speak was Barnstable County Sheriff Donna D. Buckley, who began her presentation by sharing that, by way of the National Sheriffs Association, the sheriff’s office will participate in the Sojourn 250. In celebration of the 250th anniversary of the United States, a flag will be escorted throughout the country, with Buckley announcing that it will come to Bourne on Flag Day, Sunday, June 14. A ceremony will be held in collaboration with the Massachusetts National Cemetery in Bourne and veterans organizations.

Buckley highlighted the ongoing partnership between the Town of Bourne and the sheriff’s office. She noted how, through vocational and educational programs, the inmates at the jail are able to provide services and programs to the community.

She also said that the sheriff’s office provides regional communications, handling 911 calls and dispatch. Due to the increased need for regional dispatch and the limited space at the current facility at the Joint Base Cape Cod fire station, Buckley has been working to relocate the dispatch facility to Cape Cod Community College, she said.

Buckley said she hopes that this collaboration will provide an opportunity for career and workforce development for students to experience hands-on, on-site work environments, as well as support the college’s existing related programs.

“There’s a lot of interest in the sheriff’s budget at the Legislature and our legislative delegation has been incredibly supportive, but there are some people who think that sheriffs just run jails,” Buckley said. “First of all, that is not the case, nor does it make sense.”

Buckley advocated for the regional programs, resources and services that the sheriff’s office provides to the region’s towns, such as search and rescue, SWAT, drones and crime scene investigations, to name a few.

The Barnstable County Bureau of Criminal Investigations (BCI), which collects evidence and investigates crime scenes that require specialized expertise, has been facing budgetary pressure from the state. As “an absolutely necessary public safety service,” BCI is a resource that Buckley continues to advocate for and “is not giving it up.” She added that she appreciates the support shown by police chiefs and towns in Barnstable County.

“Hopefully, the conversation and the ability for us to be able to explain exactly what the nature of the sheriff’s office is in Barnstable County will help us preserve the resources that we have,” Buckley said.

Another aspect of the sheriff’s office is ensuring that when people are released from the jail “they are in the best possible position to succeed. That is how we protect victims. That is how we keep our community safe,” Buckley said. This is done through programs in jail and a service referral program at the sheriff’s office’s post-release support center, known as the bridge center.

“Housing, transportation, legal support, find a way to pay off your tickets so you can get your license, AA meetings, mental health counseling, job interviews, employment skills,” Buckley said, listing the myriad services that the sheriff’s office connects with and refers custodians to. “We start that work in jail. We continue that work at the bridge center.”

Buckley also pointed to examples of educational vocational programs that are offered in the jail that provide resources and services, and assist with projects in the community.

Through the home-building program, inmates have been taught carpentry and other building trades. The community cooking program provides an opportunity for inmates to make homemade bread and pizza for shelters, food pantries, schools and unhoused individuals to address food insecurity within the county. Inmates are also able to learn about groundskeeping skills.

“Those are skills that we need in our community as well for people to be able to get decent-paying jobs when they are released,” Buckley said.

Siroonian inquired about the sheriff’s office continuing its two at-risk youth programs, to which Buckley replied that it will.

The free week-long public safety explorers program allows any youth in the county interested in the field to learn from experts.

The youth academy is the other free program offered by the sheriff’s office. Three weeks long in the summer, participants are referred by school adjustment counselors, courts or the state’s Department of Children and Families.

“The best way to deal with recidivism is for people not to come to jail in the first place,” Buckley said. “Our youth programs are a huge effort at the sheriff’s office. And the bridge center also supports the needs of youth.”
