Title: Food Trucks Spark Debate At Bourne Select Board
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-10T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/food-trucks-spark-debate-at-bourne-select-board/article_c8610dc9-786d-48ed-a7f2-62df6cdce70c.html

Small business and food truck owners filled the meeting room at the Bourne Veteran’s Memorial Community Center during a discussion on the presence of food trucks during concerts at Buzzards Bay Park during a select board meeting held on Tuesday , July 7 .

After event organizers, the public and town counsel spoke, the board ultimately decided to move ahead with the events as approved in March and to reexamine the Town of Bourne’s food truck policy.

The matter first arose after the board had received correspondence from Marie Oliva, president and CEO of Cape Cod Canal Regional Chamber of Commerce, on June 30, stating the chamber’s concern in regard to the financial impact the food trucks at the farmers market would have on the Main Street restaurants and requesting that the board revisit the matter.

For the past 40 years, the chamber has organized free concerts on Thursdays in July and August at Buzzards Bay Park to create a community event that stimulates the local economy along Main Street. Concerts by the Canal are held on Thursdays from July 9 to August 20, from 6 to 8 PM.

Last year, the chamber partnered with Canal Regional Farmers Market to include vendors on Thursday evenings. The market is held from June 25 through August 27, from 4 to 8 PM, and is organized by Lemon-Aide Co., a nonprofit organization founded by Stephanie Viva that also operates farmers markets in Mashpee and Barnstable.

Select Board clerk Mary Jane Mastrangelo explained why she asked that the board’s March approval of the food trucks in the farmers market’s application be reconsidered. She said that the item had been included in the consent agenda, when it should have been featured as a separate agenda item since the application included a change—the addition of food trucks—from last year.

Town Counsel Bryan F. Bertram shared that a reconsideration of a vote would have to take place the same night as the initial vote; however, the board could technically rescind a prior vote, citing Robert’s Rules of Order.

“I asked to have it put on the agenda so that we could have a discussion and talk to both sides of the issue,” Mastrangelo added, emphasizing transparency.

Bertram said that the board should focus on what it is authorized to do as it hears more on the matter during the discussion.

Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian said that she wanted to ensure that the town was following policy since “all we have to fall back on is policies… Our decision-making is driven by policy.”

First to speak before the board was Viva, who shared that this year’s Canal Regional Farmers Market is made up of 25 vendors, three of which are food trucks. She noted that at one point there were “five in the mix.”

She noted that while renewing the permit for the market, she had disclosed the presence of food trucks in the application portal and in the site map, with the police, fire and health departments also commenting on that addition.

“Respectfully, agenda placement is decided by the town, not this applicant,” Viva stated regarding the placement of the farmers market’s permit renewal. “The record shows that we disclosed everything.”

Viva said that the market also stimulates local businesses all along Main Street.

“Everyone shows gains on market night,” she said, adding that the food trucks “also exist to feed our vendors, our volunteers and the people committed to their booths from setup to breakdown. They’re part of the event’s operations. It’s not a restaurant row.”

Regarding the parking concern, Viva shared that she has been in correspondence with St. Margaret of Scotland Catholic Church to discuss serving as an overflow parking lot on Thursday so that “Main Street spaces stay open for Main Street customers.”

“Food trucks at this park are routine,” Viva said. “What would be new is unwinding a board approval mid-season on five days’ notice with no staff findings of any kind. Four months later is not a reconsideration.”

Asking that the board maintain its approval, Viva added that she would enjoy partaking in future discussions about the town’s food truck policy.

Oliva said that the chamber had partnered with the farmers market because it believed that “the market complemented in bringing additional visitors to Buzzards Bay Park while showcasing local farmers, artisans and small businesses.”

However, Oliva shared that the chamber was not notified that the market was adding food trucks to its offerings.

“While food trucks certainly have a place at many community events,” she said. “We believe this situation deserves careful consideration because of its potential economic impact on our existing brick-and-mortar businesses.”

“The businesses that sponsor these concerts should not be placed at a competitive disadvantage during the very events their contributions help make possible,” Oliva said, emphasizing that Main Street restaurants maintain storefronts, pay property taxes and invest in the community through employment of local residents and other community initiatives, and are supported by the increased traffic produced by the Thursday concert nights.

With the room filled with supporters from both sides, several audience members shared their opinions with the board, with contention palpable within the audience.

Darice DeiPrete, a co-owner of Frosty Friends Ice Creams & Treats and a Bourne resident, spoke in favor of the food trucks, as the operator of a food truck herself. She shared that as a local business and Bourne resident, she is invested in the community.

A food truck’s season is limited to seven to eight months, she said, adding that the revenue she makes largely goes toward maintaining the truck, permits and other expenses. “We don’t do it because we make money,” she said of operating a food truck. “It’s a passion that we want to work for ourselves.”

It is “ridiculous” to say that the food trucks were taking business away from restaurants on Main Street, DeiPrete said, emphasizing that there is enough business for everyone.

“We have to live, too. I have to feed my kids and pay my taxes and my permits,” she added. “We have just as many expenses as the brick-and-mortars do.”

DeiPrete noted that she “would have been more than happy to assist with making a donation” if the chamber had contacted her to support the concert.

Lauren DeGregorio, president of the Bourne Youth Council and a Bourne resident, runs the kids zone and face painting at the farmers market to “bring our communities together.” She also owns O’Playsis, an art studio and music lounge on Main Street.

Emphasizing how the market supports local businesses, she pointed out that all of the food trucks are owned and operated by Bourne residents, with the one exception being a Wareham resident.

Martin Raynor owns and operates Kono Pizza Cape Cod, a food truck, with his wife, Mary. A 30-year Bourne resident, Raynor shared how, as a business, he and his wife have given back to the community through school and sports events.

“I don’t feel we take away from the businesses in a three-hour window,” he said. “I think that food trucks should be allowed.”

Owner of Seaside Scoops & Grille, Justine Dore, shared that, as a business on Main Street, the presence of food trucks will “really dramatically affect my business” as a seasonal operation that makes the majority of its revenue in the summer months.

While she said that the farmers market is a “great idea,” it is “not good bringing in vendors for businesses that are already existing.” Dore suggested that the farmers market could feature food trucks serving foods not yet offered on Main Street.

She added that “food trucks do not have the same overhead as a regular brick-and-mortar business has; it’s a proven fact, and that’s why people are converting to food trucks.”

DeiPrete shared that she also has a short season to make enough revenue to cover monthly payments for the food truck throughout the year. “Our loans don’t just stop when the season is over,” DeiPrete said. “We still have to pay that, and we still have employees, and we still have other expenses as well.”

Prefacing that she is “not against the food trucks,” Noreen Michienzi, an owner of businesses on Main Street, said that the Thursday night concerts provide the brick-and-mortar businesses a chance to increase business. “This is our big night to get money back,” she said, adding that food trucks could be at the park on “Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday night” instead of Thursday.

“Everyone is trying to maintain their businesses as best they can,” Siroonain said.

Pivoting to policy discussions, Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem said that the board’s special events policy does not include regulations on food trucks.

“The crux of my concern here is that the municipality, the fire department, the health department inspections, need to know about food trucks,” she said. “But the Select Board’s special event policy doesn’t say food trucks can be at one-day events, but not multiple-day events. It doesn’t say it can be at Buzzards Bay Park or not at Buzzards Bay parks or at this location or not that location.”

“There are no standards of review under the special events policy, which is the Select Board’s vote,” she added regarding food trucks.

Since “the food trucks are not on town property, but they’re on the adjacent property, arguably our authority is lessened,” Bertram said of the board’s jurisdiction. In agreement with McCollem, he noted that there is “nothing that’s specific [to] food trucks or how you regulate them.”

Describing Tuesday’s discussion as a “learning event,” he recommended that the board take it as an opportunity to refine the town’s food truck regulations.

“I think at this point, given that you issued the permit, I would be most comfortable if we just let this event run the way it’s running for this season,” Bertram said, basing his legal opinion on the town’s current policy. “Particularly because we don’t have jurisdiction over the adjoining lots.”

Bertram clarified that when he said the town does not have jurisdiction over the food trucks, he was referring to their locations. “I don’t want to give anyone in the public the false impression that food trucks are not regulated entities,” he said, adding that, under state law, food trucks are required to meet safety standards, such as Board of Health permits and Fire Department inspections.

Citing the commonwealth’s food truck requirements, Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti noted that “towns can regulate the location, hours, event logistics, but they may not restrict trucks solely based on competition.”

“Wellfleet, Barnstable, Falmouth, Provincetown, Plymouth, Eastham, Boston, Worcester, Springfield—none of them restrict food trucks based on competition,” she added.

Siroonian inquired of Bertram for his legal opinion on the question of whether “the definition of farmers market, according to our policy, does not include food trucks,” even though the event was advertised as a farmers market. Bertram replied that “if we’re really looking at it strictly under our policy, if we approved it and [food trucks] were disclosed, I think we really need to respect that we issued the authorization.”

Mastrangelo agreed with Bertram that the events should continue this summer as approved. She added that when the chamber and Lemon-Aide apply for next year’s permit, she hopes “that there is a discussion between these two organizations that are saying they have a partnership for these events on Thursday night,” about logistics, such as parking and food trucks.

Select Board member Jeanne L. Azarovitz also agreed that the board should not rescind its vote to approve the farmers market permit for this summer, as the food trucks were disclosed in the application.

The board should take the time to create policy around the matter of food trucks in the Town of Bourne, she said, adding that she believes that working together and having both local food trucks and brick-and-mortar businesses will help increase Main Street’s traction and economy.

“It’s a shame that we’ve got a bunch of Bourne businesses in the room together and you all are arguing,” Azarovitz said. “We need to be working together.”

Select Board member Peter J. Meier agreed that the board should respect its March vote to approve the farmers market and use the next couple of months to determine the town’s regulations regarding food trucks.

Noting that he has “seen the benefit of both,” he stated that he would like both event organizers to present it “as a joint venture as it was intended.”

After approximately an hour of public input and discussions with Bertram and McCollem, the board unanimously approved a motion, made by Azarovitz and seconded by Mastrangelo, to refer the policy discussion on food truck regulations to the board’s policy subcommittee.

The board did not need to take any action regarding the presence of food trucks at this year’s farmers market, as it maintained its vote from March.
