Title: Guidelines And Procedures For Bourne Town Meetings
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-01T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/guidelines-and-procedures-for-bourne-town-meetings/article_539e16ba-21b1-427d-9911-f095f9f45372.html

With Annual and Special Town Meeting being held at the Bourne High School Auditorium on Monday, May 4, Bourne residents will have the opportunity to make decisions about the ongoing activities of the Town of Bourne.

Town Meeting, which serves as the legislative branch of town government, shapes how the town raises and spends tax dollars. The Annual Town Meeting will determine spending for the upcoming Fiscal Year 2027, and the Special Town Meeting will allow adjustments to the current fiscal year.

The meeting will begin once 125 registered voters of Bourne are present, with a minimum of 100 voters required for a Town Meeting to continue. While anyone may attend Town Meeting, only registered voters residing in Bourne may vote.

Both the Annual and Special Town Meetings are being held on May 4. The Annual Town Meeting will begin at 7 PM and recess at 7:30 PM, at which time the Special Town Meeting will begin, Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem wrote to the Enterprise. Once the special warrant has been addressed, Annual Town Meeting will resume, she added. Tuesday, May 5, has been designated as the second night of Town Meeting, if necessary.

In addition to Town Meeting voters, there are a variety of other key participants with certain roles and responsibilities that are outlined in the Voter’s Handbook.

The town moderator, who is an elected official, shall call the meeting to order, review the rules and oversee the Town Meeting, as per “a set of guidelines based on Massachusetts General Laws, Town Charter and Bylaws, Town Meeting Time, and local practice to ensure a fair, orderly, and efficient meeting,” the handbook states. Also an elected official, the town clerk will record the votes and maintain the official meeting record. Town counsel will be present to provide legal guidance.

Acting as the executive branch of the town government, the Select Board, which is composed of elected officials, has prepared the annual and special warrants and shall present and explain the articles.

The Finance Committee is appointed by the moderator to review and make recommendations to Town Meeting regarding the financial impacts of the articles. Articles about matters such as zoning will have recommendations made by the Planning Board, which is composed of elected members.

Once the meeting has begun, the discussion and voting on articles start. After an article is introduced via a positive motion and a recommendation is made, the moderator will allow debate on the matter.

Town Meeting members, upon being recognized to go before the microphone, shall state their name and share comments on the article being discussed at the moment. Comments are limited to three and a half minutes and must be concise, on topic, respectful, addressed to the moderator, and avoid repeating previous comments. The moderator has the authority to remove those who disrupt order, as “applause, boos, interruptions and personal attacks are not permitted,” the Voter’s Handbook states.

Upon the conclusion of the discussion of an article, its motion can either be amended or voted on.

Amendments, which must remain in the scope of the article, are required to be submitted in writing. If the amendment increases spending past the Finance Committee’s recommendation, the amendment must also feature a reduction that equally offsets the amount elsewhere. This is known as the Bourne Rule. The Voter’s Handbook also states that amendments to zoning articles are limited to non-substantive changes and clerical corrections.

To vote, registered voters must be seated in the designated voter section with a visible voter tag. There are various voting methods; electronic voting using a clicker is the primary one. Votes may also be made by voice, standing, or a secret ballot.

This process repeats itself until all articles on both annual and special warrants have been addressed, at which time a motion to dissolve shall end the meeting. However, a motion to adjourn the meeting can continue it until a later time, date, or place.

Additional information about Town Meeting logistics and procedures can be found by searching “Voter Handbook 2026” on the Town of Bourne’s website, bourne-ma.gov .
