Title: Keene House Relocation Funds To Return To Bourne CPC
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-02-27T00:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/keene-house-relocation-funds-to-return-to-bourne-cpc/article_5531d5c3-afed-4899-bd65-0fd1107e91c5.html

The Bourne Community Preservation Committee (CPC) voted on February 18 that the $250,000 in Community Preservation Act (CPA) funds allocated to the Bourne Historical Society (BHS) to move the historic Keene House from Sandwich Road to the Aptucxet Trading Post Museum be returned to the Community Preservation Committee. The BHS had voted to return the funds to the CPC last year.

“They are no longer pursuing the placement of Keene House on the Aptucxet Post property,” CPC chairman Barry H. Johnson said. Mavis Robinson, the president of the Bourne Historical Society, had notified Johnson of the decision in a letter dated November 12, 2025.

Andrew Cooney, the Bourne Open Space Committee representative on the CPC, asked what led to that decision.

“The issue isn’t that we’re not interested in the building. It’s that by moving it, it loses its historic significance. So we wouldn’t be able to get grants” to conduct required work on the building, said Kathy Fox Alfano, the Housing Authority’s representative on the CPC and a trustee of the society. “That’s why we are returning the money.”

Fox Alfano also shared that the difficulty in moving the building played a role in the decision. Due to the house being “held up by the center chimney…people did not want to touch it and move it down to Aptucxet.”

The building itself was “too large…to fit down the road,” she said of the proposed move, which could have potentially required trees to be cut down to make room.

“It’s not that we don’t want anything to do with it,” Fox Alfano said, of the society’s vote to return the proposed project’s allocated funds to the CPA funds. “It’s just that we can’t move it.”

Johnson said, “It doesn’t mean the money can’t be reappropriated in the future, but right now, it should go back into the fund.”

Johnson, Fox Alfano, and Cooney, along with the remaining CPC members, John J. Duggan Jr., Melvin Peter Holmes, Neil F. Langille, and Laurianne Gilbert, voted unanimously to return the allocated project funds to the CPA funds.

At Town Meeting in May 2023, Article 5 on the Special Town Meeting warrant requested $250,000 in CPA funds to move the Keene House from 9 Sandwich Road to property either currently owned, or to be owned in the future, by the Bourne Historical Society.

Article 20 on the Annual Town Meeting warrant also applied to the Keene House move. The article requested authorizing the Select Board to transfer ownership of a parcel of town-owned land on Sandwich Road to the Historical Society. The Keene House would be moved there if it were determined that the house could not be moved to the Historical Society’s preferred location, the Aptucxet Trading Post Museum.

Both Article 5 and Article 20 passed. However, by October 2023, the Historical Society reported that efforts to move the Keene House to town-owned land on Sandwich Road had proven unsuccessful, due to a lack of agreement “among various potential stakeholders,” Robinson reported in an email dated October 18, 2023.

“It became clear to the BHS board that, at this point, the only current viable site for the Keene House as a BHS-run project is at our property at Aptucxet,” she said in the email.

Town assessor records for the 9 Sandwich Road property show One Trowbridge Road LLC, a corporation owned by local developer Vincent P. Michienzi, as the legal owner of the property as of March 2013.

In late March 2022, during a meeting of the Historical Commission, Michienzi told members that the building was unsafe and that it was not economically feasible to try to maintain it. He announced his plans to demolish the structure.

During that meeting, Michienzi also noted that, under the town bylaw, demolition of a significant building can be delayed for one year. He acknowledged the one-year limitation in the bylaw and said he would be willing to wait until then to take the house down. A demolition delay order was subsequently placed on the house on May 10, 2022.

Bourne town bylaws call for preservation and protection of historically significant buildings “that reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, economic, political or social history of the Town.” The bylaw’s intent is to offer “an opportunity to develop preservation solutions for properties threatened with demolition.”

“To achieve these purposes, the Bourne Historical Commission is empowered to advise the building inspector with respect to the issuance of permits for demolition of significant buildings,” the bylaw reads, “to allow demolition under conditions designed to minimize the loss of distinctive features of significant buildings.”

The bylaw also defines a significant building as “any building or portion thereof which in whole or in part is more than 75 years old or is listed in the historical survey of the Town of Bourne and on file with the Bourne Historical Commission.”

Despite having the legal right as of May 10, 2023, to take the building down, Michienzi has not exercised that right and instead allowed the Historical Society to explore saving the historic home. At the same time, he has announced his own plans for the property, which include a 32-unit housing project, with 25% of the units designated as affordable.

At Annual Town Meeting in May 2024, residents voted against Article 10, a CPC article seeking approval of $80,000 in CPA funds to subsidize Michienzi’s housing project. Critics of the article commented that the town would reap no benefit from the project, while supporters said the project’s units would help boost the town’s Subsidized Housing Inventory closer to the 10% mark the state has targeted for communities.

Also known as the Perry-Ellis-Keene House to pay homage to all of its previous owners, the Bourne Historical Society’s website notes that it is the last of four houses built by the sons of the man believed to have founded the Town of Bourne, Ezra Perry. It is believed to have been built sometime in the 1690s, making it more than 330 years old.

Ezra and Elizabeth Perry were the first Europeans to settle the Village of Bourne, the Historical Society’s website states. Ezra Perry was born in 1625 in Devonshire, England, and came to this area from Sandwich at the approximate time of his marriage to Elizabeth Burgess in 1651.

The couple had seven children. The first four were born in Sandwich: Ezra Jr. (1653), Deborah (1654), John (1657) and Sarah (1659). Three more children were born in Bourne: Samuel (1667), Benjamin (1670) and Remembrance (1676).

Starting around 1690, Ezra Perry Sr.’s four sons built homes all within half a mile of their father and half a mile of each other. It is believed that, after the boys reached the age of 18 and married, their father gave them land and other valuables, such as livestock and furniture. Historic records indicate that:

Ezra Perry Jr. built his house “on the brink of the hill near his father’s house.” This house was either torn down or destroyed by fire.

John Perry built his home “on the northerly side of the road leading to Monument Neck.” After being owned and occupied by John’s descendants for three generations, the home burned down in 1794.

Samuel Perry built his house near the Old Bourne Cemetery, “on the opposite side of the road and some distance from it.” It was described as “a public house or tavern.” This house was later torn down by Samuel’s grandson, Seth Perry.

Benjamin Perry built his house on land next to the present-day Briggs McDermott House at 22 Sandwich Road. Around 1735, Benjamin sold his house to Gideon Ellis and, in 1767, Ellis moved it to its present location, 9 Sandwich Road.

Years later, it was owned by Gideon’s grandson, Thomas Ellis, until his death in 1865. Since then, the Benjamin Perry house has been owned by various descendants of Gideon Ellis. It was at one time the home of noted town historian Betsy D. Keene, a Perry descendant.
