Title: Local Donor, Recipient Raise Awareness For Organ Donations
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-10T12:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/local-donor-recipient-raise-awareness-for-organ-donations/article_da8c33cc-c01c-431b-bc53-060f29e1329a.html

Kidney donor Kelly DeMello of Buzzards Bay and recipient Paul Rakoski of Newmarket, New Hampshire, recently participated in the Transplant Games of America in Denver.

Since 1990, the Transplant Games of America have served as a nationwide congregation of donor recipients, living donors, donor families, those waiting for a transplant and professionals in the industry, uniting to raise awareness of the importance of eye, organ and tissue donations.

Held every two years, this year’s participants competed in more than 20 sporting events and more than 60 special events and programs last month.

Between 8,000 and 10,000 people who were impacted or involved with transplants were in attendance, 966 of whom gathered to break a Guinness World Record as the largest assembly of living donors and recipients in one place.

DeMello and Rakoski were two of those 966. Their story goes back to their time as students at Massachusetts Maritime Academy (MMA). Part of a friend group of six, the group referred to itself as “a club.”

Rakoski discovered the Games after he received a kidney donation from DeMello and joined Team New England. Various states and regions form teams to compete at the Games.

This year was the sixth time Rakoski competed at the Games, where he participated in basketball, golf and trivia.

“I love to compete,” Rakoski said. “At my first Games in ‘14, I was all about going in to get medals and that mindset changed real quickly.” He pointed to the impact of seeing 1-year-olds who had undergone organ transplants, noting, “It’s about celebrating that we are all alive together.”

Describing the Games as a “family reunion,” Rakoski explained the unique experience that comes from being part of the community, noting how people with whom he had developed friendships from the Games have died.

It was DeMello’s first time attending the Games; she competed in track and field, golf and a five-kilometer run. Recounting the Games as “amazing,” she said the results “did not matter” as she observed children under the age of 10 who were organ recipients.

“These little kids are just pumping everyone up and you’re pumping them up,” DeMello said. “It was just amazing to watch all of these people come together and truly celebrate life. You cheer for everyone, whether they are coming in first or coming in last.” She shared how everyone was cheering for an 84-year-old woman competing in shot put.

“It is good for your heart and your soul,” DeMello said, emphasizing how she met “amazing people.” She added that she is “in awe” of the strength of donor families, as she shared how one had donated their late son’s organs.

“It does not replace one life for the other, but it certainly enriches a life for someone that is not there anymore,” DeMello said about seeing organ recipients at the Games.

“We will definitely be going back,” she added, noting that immediately after arriving at the Games, her husband said that he wants to return when the next Games are held and that she had also told her cousin, who is a living donor, that he should join them at the next Games.

“I’ll always go back as long as I can,” Rakoski said.

Beginning in 1994, while a student at MMA, Rakoski experienced symptoms, such as heat intolerance in his hands and feet, and was misdiagnosed with arthritis.

After “continuing to live life” and moving to Maryland, he started to experience back pain in the early 2000s. When MRI results revealed cysts on his kidneys, his general physician discovered a buildup of protein and high levels of creatinine, which are signs of kidney damage. He referred Rakoski to a nephrologist, a doctor who specializes in kidneys, who then diagnosed him with polycystic kidney disease, meaning he had multiple cysts on his kidneys.

After his wife recommended that he get a second opinion, Rakoski went to Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, where doctors told him that while he did not have polycystic kidney disease, they could not figure out what condition he had.

For the next three months, starting in November 2006, Rakoski underwent various tests to determine the cause of his kidney damage. Ultimately, a kidney biopsy revealed that Rakoski had been battling Fabry’s disease, an inherited and rare X-linked genetic disorder that impacts kidneys, as well as the skin, brain and heart.

Over the years, the “club” remained in contact, with Rakoski regularly sharing updates on his health. After he and his wife returned to New England to be closer to family in 2007, Rakoski began seeing a nephrologist at Massachusetts General Hospital.

“At the first appointment, my kidney doctor said, ‘You are going to need a transplant. I don’t want you to go on dialysis because dialysis is very hard on the body and with a living donor, the success rate is much higher with the kidney lasting a longer time,’” Rakoski recalled.

To share this news, Rakoski reunited with DeMello and her husband—who had also been a fellow MMA classmate—and another MMA classmate and her then-fiancé at a dinner in November 2007. He said he had only provided the group with the name of the Mass General transplant coordinator, emphasizing how patients are not involved with the matching process.

DeMello shared how the morning after the dinner, she and her husband quickly decided to call to see if they were matches for Rakoski . Of the two, she was a “good match” due to her blood type.

In February 2009, almost two years after his diagnosis of Fabry’s disease, DeMello donated one of her kidneys to Rakoski. “Kelly saved my life,” Rakoski said. “I know people who have been on the waitlist who are unfortunately no longer here.”

“If Kelly wasn’t a match, I have no idea if I would be alive and that’s God’s honest truth. I don’t know if I would have made it through dialysis and waited long enough for a match,” Rakoski said, adding that in New England the wait for a kidney is around eight years and that there is a high chance that the recipient’s body will reject the transplanted organ.

At the time of his surgery, Rakoski was told that the average amount of time a transplanted kidney would function was 10 to 15 years. Noting how kidney transplants now last between 20 and 50 years, Rakoski’s hope is that DeMello’s donation is the only one he will need.

Now, nearly 17½ years later, Rakoski rates his health a 10 out of 10. He added, however, that the mental recovery of processing the fact that one of DeMello’s kidneys is now inside him was almost more challenging than the physical aspect of it. “I didn’t know how I could say thank you enough to Kelly for what she did,” he said, noting how he was able to participate in major family milestones, like seeing his niece and nephew graduate from college.

“All I can do is stay healthy and take my medication,” he said, and when he does, he always thinks of DeMello’s donation, to which DeMello replied that she feels privileged and lucky to be part of his journey as a living donor.

Both DeMello and Rakoski volunteer with New England Donor Services (NEDS), a nonprofit organization that primarily coordinates tissue and organ donations between recipients and deceased donors, but also, through its volunteer network, works to promote and raise awareness for organ donations.

As a NEDS team member and living donor, Caroline Murray works with volunteers like DeMello and Rakoski as well as other donors, recipients, donor families and others to raise awareness for organ and tissue donation and to register to become a donor, which can be done at a local Department of Motor Vehicles office or National Registry.

“I motivate people to talk to people that have been affected by donations—recipients or donor families—to see how it has affected their life, because it is not really something you focus on until it happens to you—and then it is your life,” Murray said. “Once you have been affected by it, it is every day that you are thinking about it.”

Noting there is a “great need for donors” for “over 100,000 people just in the US waiting for a life-saving transplant,” Murray emphasized the significant role the Games play in raising awareness for donations through photos and people’s stories.

“It’s incredible,” Murray said of her first experience at the Transplant Games of America.

DeMello shared how when someone at the Games asked her for advice for donating, she emphasized the importance of “owning it,” especially in situations where people ask why she donated: “Why wouldn’t I [donate]?”

After undergoing surgery to donate one of her kidneys, DeMello noted how “it was an easy transition back to my normal life,” adding how “Paul, on a daily basis, is reminded of it, whereas there are days where I wouldn’t even know that I didn’t have another kidney. I would do it again in a heartbeat.”

Her motivation in raising awareness for organ donations is to “help Paul and others who might need it” find matches.

Rakoski said that DeMello’s and Murray’s organ donations “removed me and another person from ever being on the list,” referring to the transplant list on which patients wait years for a deceased donation. “Every person we remove off that list, someone gets that much closer to a transplant,” he said. “With the goal of getting rid of that list if, God willing, that day ever happens.”
