Title: MassDOT Interested In Vacant Land For Scenic Highway On-Ramp To Sagamore Bridge
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-01-30T00:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/massdot-interested-in-vacant-land-for-scenic-highway-on-ramp-to-sagamore-bridge/article_bde3bfeb-ae4f-4986-9675-a3656201b914.html

The Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) bridges team presented to the Bourne Select Board on January 20, explaining its interest and need for the town-owned vacant parcel at 1025 Scenic Highway—the location of the demolished former fire station—for the construction of the new Sagamore Bridge.

“The main thing I want to do here today is to make sure we are all on the same page as to where the parcel is located and to describe the reasons why it’s needed for the completion of the replacement of the Sagamore Bridge,” said David Anderson, program manager at HNTB. HNTB serves as a consultant for MassDOT. “There’s obviously a process involved in transferring property. I’m not here to talk about exactly what that process looks like; that would be something that would happen subsequently.”

Since Route 3 and Route 6 are being moved to the west for the new bridge, the on-ramp coming from Scenic Highway onto Sagamore Bridge is being moved to this parcel to ensure designs align with current standards. A bike and pedestrian pathway over the bridge will also be included.

While the ramp and pathway would be located in the northern corner of the parcel, the rest of the property would be needed to construct the improvements, and the property would be needed long-term to perform maintenance on those properties.

After the presentation was completed, MassDOT took questions from the Select Board and the public.

“Are you looking for right of way or transfer?” Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo asked.

Anderson said that it is “envisioned that the property would become owned by MassDOT.”

Bourne resident John York asked, “Does the town really want to give up that property? Does it need to? Can it be accomplished otherwise? ...I think it’s a valid question for the Select Board to think about.”

Mastrangelo asked if Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem could explain the steps required for the town to transfer land, citing appraisals and fair market values. With McCollem deferring the question to MassDOT, Anderson said that MassDOT’s Right of Way Bureau would work directly with the town.

“Is this a situation where MassDOT is going to take that property by eminent domain?” Mastrangelo asked.

Anderson reiterated that, regarding the process, he is not an expert, with his role at the presentation being “make sure we were all on the same page regarding the need for the property, and the next step would be a process between MassDOT Right of Way Bureau and the town on how to make this work.”

Anne Canaday, a project manager at MassDOT, added that the property is “currently under the care, custody and control of the town, so it’s the town’s and it would be given to the care, custody and control of the commonwealth, with MassDOT leading that charge.”

“So this is something that would come to us, as a Select Board, and we would have to either sponsor it and it would have to go to Town Meeting for a vote,” Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti said. “Is what I’m under the assumption of, correct?” McCollem said that only Town Meeting can approve the transfer of land.

Canaday said that MassDOT’s Right of Way Bureau can follow up with the town to discuss the process.
