Title: MassDevelopment Presents Update On Base Cantonment Redevelopment Plan
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-03-27T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/massdevelopment-presents-update-on-base-cantonment-redevelopment-plan/article_06f106a9-3702-4293-94e7-8f6649943cd1.html

MassDevelopment appeared before the Bourne Select Board on March 17 to provide an update regarding the Joint Base Cape Cod Cantonment Area Master Plan to redevelop approximately 7,000 acres of land known as the cantonment area, located on the south side of the base.

The cantonment area is used for a variety of purposes, including administration, mission and life support, active training and a conservation area.

Erikk Hokenson, senior vice president of real estate and director of real estate, military and defense sector initiative at MassDevelopment, noted the area is complex due to “layers of land ownership, leases, permits, a lot of shared infrastructure, utilities, overlapping mission requirements, secured areas, buffers and then all the natural resources,” which “underscores the need for this master plan.”

As a quasi-public agency, MassDevelopment is tasked with the “economic development and land banking across Massachusetts…and work to stimulate businesses, drive economic growth and help communities thrive,” Hokenson said.

As part of the Military Asset and Security Strategy Task Force, MassDevelopment also assists in “enhancing and strengthening the six military installations across the commonwealth,” as well as supporting the defense sector and Pentagon agencies in Massachusetts, Hokenson added.

Hokenson said the “goals and scope of the plan have changed” to also include recreational spaces, commercial uses and conservation areas.

Noting that the initiative had initially focused on providing housing, he said that “early in that process, it just became very apparent that, given all the complexities of the cantonment area, and the opportunity that this presented, we needed to take a more holistic look at it.”

Hokenson said the goals of the project include optimizing use of JBCC, increasing organizational efficiency, supporting the base’s current missions, accommodating its future needs and facilitating reuse of excess property as appropriate.

Plan objectives, he said, are to develop a combined military and nonmilitary land use and building plan; a coordination plan to enable current and future uses and an implementation plan “with actions, steps, timing and public investments.”

It was announced in July that VHB, Inc., a Massachusetts-based civil engineering and design firm, would lead a consultant team in the development of the master plan. The firm will work alongside Sasaki Associates, Inc., RKG Associates, Inc., Innes Land Strategies Group, Inc., and Goulston & Storrs. Hokenson added that MassDevelopment has also collaborated with the Cape Cod Commission.

Hokenson outlined the project’s 16-month planning process, which includes four phases: the discovery phase, which involves a series of listening sessions; the framework phase, which includes sessions dedicated to the project’s vision; the scenario phase, which will encompass a series of workshops focused on the project; and the documentation phase, which will be dedicated primarily to public presentations.

The plan is currently in the discovery phase, which has featured “facilitated discussions with various subject matter experts and other stakeholders,” he said, and is expecting to “move toward the framework phase in the second half of the calendar year.”

Select Board member Peter J. Meier said the proposal to reuse the land to create housing “is long overdue.” Noting that Bourne Public Schools educates a large number of children who live on the base and the town’s limited amount of athletic fields, Meier suggested that the master plan could feature athletic fields and walking trails.

He added that “it’s a win-win for all of us” to have the master plan include recreational uses for the community, as well as housing.

Select Board clerk Jeanne L. Azarovitz said the plan sounded “fantastic” but expressed concerns about the project’s impact on schools, housing, transportation and the evacuation procedure.

“The impact of having additional traffic [and] people…is going to have a direct impact on our town services; they’re stretched already,” Azarovitz said. “Be mindful from a big-eye point of view to include those alternative modes of transportation.”

Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian said she hopes the town is updated frequently. She noted the importance for the town and its residents to have “an avenue” with MassDevelopment to express concerns and be represented.

“My main focus is to continue the conversation, and how a lot of the decision-making impacts our community,” she added.

Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti agreed, emphasizing the concerns for alternative modes of transportation and the impact on the school system. “There’s a lot to think about, but looks like a great plan to start,” she said.

Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo noted that the plan is a “work in progress.”

“We want to see this as a livable community,” John York of Pocasset said. “There’s a lot of potential there.”

He warned that it would be a mistake to “make this an isolated community and not take the steps necessary to integrate it into the community.”

“If there’s something out there that draws our community to the base—recreational functions, things that could tie the Upper Cape together—that’s another way to make a thriving community,” York added.

However, he said, “none of that can happen unless you have sufficient nonmotor vehicle transportation facilities to make that connection,” noting dangers that currently exist when using nonvehicular transportation to reach JBCC.

York asked Hokenson about MassDevelopment’s plan to incorporate connectivity into the master plan. Speaking from a conceptual level, Hokenson agreed with the challenges of connectivity, noting the size, location and design of the cantonment area.

“We do expect that transportation, mobility, [and] connectivity will be a part of this planning effort,” Hokenson said. “We’re always looking to encourage more nonmotor vehicle or more active modes of transportation,” noting the potential positive impacts of being inclusive and reducing carbon emissions and traffic.

“We’re really looking forward to working with the base, its many users, the communities and the public on identifying any potential new uses, in the most appropriate locations,” Hokenson said.

More information about the master plan can be found at jointbasecc.com .
