Title: Nancy Jack Todd Leaves Legacy Of Ecological Sustainability
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2025-06-13T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/falmouth/news/nancy-jack-todd-leaves-legacy-of-ecological-sustainability/article_d1ca26e6-e4ab-4bf4-927b-ef8c588efe52.html

Often called the face of the early environmental movement, Nancy Jack Todd, who co-founded the New Alchemy Institute and Ocean Arks International in Falmouth, died on May 30. She was 87.

“As co-founder of the New Alchemy Institute with two nerdy biologists [husband John H. Todd and William O. McLarney], she brought her strong people skills to the New Alchemy Institute, which played a huge part in its day-to-day viability, and she did the same for Ocean Arks International,” her daughter Rebecca Todd told the Enterprise.

After receiving a grant, the trio established the New Alchemy Institute at a farm in Hatchville in 1969. It was a place for those “interested in self-reliance, safe efficient food production, avoidance of pollution and use of renewable energy as an alternative to fossil fuel energy,” said Earle Barnhardt, a former staff and board member of the institute, and current co-director of the Green Center.

The founding of Ocean Arks International, another non-profit focused on ecological sustainability, would come later.

Through their work together, she and John Todd, received The Bioneers Award, The Lindbergh Award for Design, The Daimler Chrysler Award for Design, The UN Award, the Threshold Award and the Santa Barbara Eco Hero Award.

They “were a close team,” said Rebecca Todd, “She shared his deep love of the natural world and was able to understand, interpret, and communicate his ecological design ideas as nobody else could.”

Nancy Todd edited the Journal of the New Alchemists, The Book of the New Alchemists and Annals of Earth, authored “A Safe and Sustainable World,” and co-authored with John Todd, “Tomorrow Is Our Permanent Address” and “Bioshelters, Ocean Arks, City Farming; Ecology as the Basis for Design.”

“John was the public speaker and Nancy the writer, and each needed the other to create true ‘alchemy,’” said Hilda Maingay, who started as a part-time administrator at the New Alchemy Institute before carrying on the legacy of the institute through her work as co-director at the Green Center. Seeing “the work her husband did when he was teaching students and witnessing the environmental degradation especially of aquatic ecosystems” motivated Nancy Todd in her work at the New Alchemy Institute, Maingay said.

“Nancy was an important and critical communicator of the importance of living an ecological and sustainable life contributing to fostering a transition to a kind, just and positively impactful society,” said Ron Zweig, former lead of the New Alchemy Institute’s aquaculture, former Water Quality Management Committee member, author of some articles in the Journal of New Alchemists and Annals of Earth, who currently consults on shellfish aquaculture for estuarine water quality restoration, among other interventions.

While communication—particularly in the form of writing—was her passion, she was the hostess-at-large with “potential funders, reporters, writers, film producers” often visiting, said Maingay.

Rebecca Todd remembers her mother working in the gardens, cooking and organizing “communal lunches under the mulberry tree by the farmhouse, now Alchemy Farm” and “long magical candlelit dinner parties in the soft summer air, with the most interesting of people.”

“She also really enjoyed traveling, giving talks, and meeting and interacting with the wide range of interesting and visionary people they encountered in their work—from the innovative thinkers and doers she met through William Irwin Thompson’s Lindisfarne Association starting in the 1970s, to Marlon Brando, Margaret Mead and deposed Iranian royalty,” said Rebecca Todd.

The New Alchemy Institute “was a literal mecca,” said Barnhart, having met his now wife, Hilda Maingay, there. “New Alchemy Institute did unique, groundbreaking, innovative work in several areas—tilapia aquaculture and hydroponics, biological management of pests in greenhouses and demonstration of solar-heated bioshelter greenhouses for northern climates.”

“We worked hard and at the same, we played hard, because work and play were all one. We did not have to clock in at 8 AM and clock out at 5 PM. We worked, we created, we researched and brainstormed every hour of the day as our daily lives of kids, household would allow,” said Maingay, “Nancy and John allowed a lot of freedom and with it responsibility to design, develop and execute our own research projects. Intellectual curiosity, creativity and work ethics were more important than one’s academic background.”

Due to lack of and difficulties in securing federal funding, the New Alchemy Institute stopped its activities around 1990, with the institute’s last board of directors deciding to transfer its research to be managed by Barnhart and Maingay under the Green Center.

But the legacy of the institute lives on; people who had participated in the institute’s Saturday workshops, lunches, dinners and other events, such as the program allowing 4th graders to visit the institute for a day, often came back to reminisce about their experiences at the institute.

In 1982, Nancy and John Todd founded Ocean Arks International, “a non-profit research and outreach organization ... with the goal of spreading the ideas and practices of ecological sustainability,” such as ecological technologies, according to the Ocean Arks website.

Nancy Todd is remembered by her family for her determination, her “instinctive love,” her humor, her colorful jewelry and her love of ballet, having performed with Heather Shepley’s Summer Dance Theater since the 1980s.

Born in Johannesburg, South Africa, to Canadian parents Vaughn and Mary Evelyn (McGavin) Jack just before the outbreak of World War II, she, her parents and younger sister, Barbara, managed to sail back to North America on the last ocean liner to cross the Atlantic Ocean without being sunk.

Due to her father’s employment at General Motors, her childhood was spent in Buenos Aires, Argentina, Johannesburg again, Montreal, Quebec, and Smoke Rise, New Jersey, before settling in London, Ontario, Canada.

It was in London at Medway High School where she would meet her future husband and collaborator, John Todd. After graduating, she attended the University of Western Ontario in London to study history, while John Todd went to McHill University in Montreal.

During the earlier years of their marriage, they lived in Ann Arbor, Michigan, while John Todd was working on his PhD at the University of Michigan, and San Diego, California, before moving to Falmouth, where he had accepted a position as scientist at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. The couple had three children, Rebecca Todd, Jonathan Todd and Susannah Todd.

“With all the moving, Nancy had craved a lasting place to belong, and when she was finally able to settle on Cape Cod, she put down deep roots.” said Rebecca Todd.

Known for always having fresh flowers on the table, she had an “ability to name almost every plant and animal she encountered,” said Rebecca Todd.

She also loved music and activism, having been a peace activist in Ann Arbor, Michigan during the Vietnam War.

“Some of my earliest memories are of peace marches she took me to. Joan Baez and Ian and Sylvia and Pete Seeger were the soundtracks of my early childhood,” said Rebecca Todd, “Pete Seeger was a fan of hers in turn, and an enthusiastic subscriber to Annals of Earth. One day, I came home to our house on Cape Cod and there was Pete Seeger on the porch.”

Her legacy “lives through all of us who were touched by her and carry pieces of her vision forward in the world,” added Rebecca Todd, highlighting how the “renewed interest by members of the younger generation in the … work of New Alchemy and Ocean Arks” is in large part “due to [Nancy Todd’s] documentation of it via her editing and writing.”

Nancy Jack Todd leaves her husband, John H. Todd; her children, Rebecca Todd, Jonathan Todd and Susannah Todd; her grandchildren; her sister, Barbara Jack; and other extended family members.
