Title: New Owners Of Sub-Marines Sandwich Shop: Ready To Serve Community
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-02-06T00:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/new-owners-of-sub-marines-sandwich-shop-ready-to-serve-community/article_94291ecf-42ac-4447-bee8-38bb0a7249e1.html

“People love sandwiches for lunch, breakfast, dinner,” said Milan Basnet, the new co-owner and co-manager of Sub-Marines. “We want to give the best sandwich at any time of the day.”

That is the goal of the new team behind Sub-Marines sandwich shop at 282 Main Street in Buzzards Bay, which re-opened last month. Basnet, alongside his wife, Rekha Basnet, and longtime friend Dhruba Khadka, are the new owners and managers of the shop.

The trio wants to make the shop “better and bigger,” explaining that whatever is “in the past, is past,” Milan Basnet said in regard to the previous owners.

With around 10 years of experience in the restaurant industry, this is not the Basnets’ and Khadka’s first joint venture. They also own and operate Easy Street Restaurant, an American fine dining restaurant and bar in downtown Nantucket that opened in March.

Wanting to stay close to their restaurant on Nantucket and recognizing the demand and versatility of a good sandwich, Basnet said the location near the Bourne Bridge afforded the opportunity to provide “good service, good food, good quality ingredients” to the community, cadets at Massachusetts Maritime Academy and people visiting in the summer.

“Everyone’s welcome at any time of the day,” Basnet said. “If you have tried in the past, and then you didn’t like it, please come and try. It’s completely different. Everything is reworked.”

The Reuben, Thanksgiving sandwich and the Italian have been the shop’s bestselling sandwiches so far; however, the chicken bacon ranch sandwich is a personal favorite for Basnet.

“We slice our own meat here,” Basnet said. Citing the trio’s almost-decade-long time in the food service industry, he said that “with that experience we know what kind of bread is good, what kind of meat is good…we do a lot of prep” and use “hand-picked ingredients.”

“We put our heart into the sandwich,” Basnet said.

In addition to 22 different sandwiches, the shop serves salads, smoothies and freshly baked cookies, and plans to serve lobster rolls and ice cream in the summer months.

With the busy summer season beginning in several months, the new management team is spending the winter months getting involved in the community and is actively offering to help the community by donating sandwiches and other food items to organizations and the town.

Since the shop opened, Khadka and Basnet have been a two-man team, but for the summer, they plan “to hire local kids who need jobs” to provide opportunities for the local community.

“We want to serve the best sandwich,” Basnet said. “We want to give [the community] good service, and then if they need any kind of help from us, we are always there.”

Currently, the shop is open from 10 AM to 7 PM, but once it gets to the busy season, it will be open from 10 AM to 10 PM. Sub-Marines sandwiches are also available on DoorDash, UberEats and online at bit.ly/Sub-MarinesOnlineOrder .
