Title: Pocasset Water Quality Coalition Advocates For Stricter Cesspool Regulations
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-06-19T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/pocasset-water-quality-coalition-advocates-for-stricter-cesspool-regulations/article_8b528a4e-edc0-4fde-a8d3-767b05df5bba.html

Pocasset Water Quality Coalition president Keith Barber advocated for changing the amount of time that Bourne residents have to upgrade a cesspool to a septic system from two years to one year during a Board of Health meeting on June 10.

Barber made the proposal on behalf of the coalition and its approximately 300 members.

Operating as a nonprofit organization, the coalition’s mission is “to restore the water quality of Hen Cove, Barlow’s Landing harbor, and the inlet of Wings Neck to healthy environmental levels,” the group’s website states.

The coalition correlates the presence of cesspools with bacterial growths that are causing closures along the coastline.

“We’ve had several years now where at the beginning of the season the beach is closed for over a week,” Barber said. “Right when everyone shows up for the Fourth of July.”

Cesspools are nonconforming systems that do not align with the existing regulations as stipulated in 310 CMR 15.000, which is Title 5 of the Massachusetts State Environmental Code. They are automatically considered a failed system.

The Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection and local boards of health enforce 310 CMR 15.000, which outlines the standards for on-site sewage disposal systems.

Specifically, 310 CMR 15.305 outlines the stipulations surrounding deadlines for completion of upgrades: “If a system is failing to protect public health, safety, welfare or the environment as set forth in 310 CMR 15.303(1) or 15.304(1), the owner or operator shall upgrade the system within two years of discovery unless a shorter period of time is set by the Local Approving Authority or the Department based upon the existence of an imminent health hazard.”

The Town of Bourne follows the state regulation, a representative from the Health Department said in a telephone call with the Enterprise on Wednesday , June 17 . If a cesspool is identified, the property owners would be notified by the Health Department to replace the cesspool.

Barber said on June 10 that “to allow someone with an identified cesspool to have two years to replace it” is “way too long,” adding that residents are usually aware that their property has a cesspool.

He noted that after examining the regulation, the coalition found that “municipalities are allowed to make rules stricter than the state.”

Acknowledging the financial challenges that replacing a cesspool can inflict on a homeowner, Barber highlighted that Barnstable County “has 0%, 2% or 4% loans that are available for homeowners to replace a failed system.” He noted that the state’s tax rebate program can also be of assistance.

He concluded that the coalition “would like to encourage the Bourne Board of Health to take the lead on Cape Cod and lower the time to replace a cesspool to one year.”

The Health Department said on Wednesday that if the Pocasset Water Quality Coalition wants the Town of Bourne to have stricter guidelines as proposed by Barber, the Board of Health would have to place it on the agenda to be discussed, reviewed and potentially voted on.
