Title: Proposed CPA-Funded Articles Presented To Bourne FinCom, Select Board
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-03-20T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/proposed-cpa-funded-articles-presented-to-bourne-fincom-select-board/article_a95055c7-0088-4a44-aee1-57e7019e8e27.html

The Bourne Finance Committee and the Select Board heard presentations for the Fiscal Year 2027 Community Preservation Act (CPA) funding proposals March 16 and March 17, respectively. Both will vote at a later date on whether or not to recommend the proposed CPA-funded articles to the May Town Meeting.

The Bourne Community Preservation Committee (CPC) had previously voted to recommend all proposals, CPC chair and Town Clerk Barry H. Johnson stated. He added that there are funds available in the CPA to pay for all the proposals.

The Bourne Recreation Department and Recreation Committee presented a request of $400,000 for the Cataumet Schoolhouse hardcourt project, which would feature a new post-tension concrete court with a 20-year guarantee and fencing to address disrepair, as well as improvements to make the parking, path and court compliant with the American Disabilities Act (ADA).

At the Finance Committee’s meeting on March 16, committee member Arthur Wayne Sampson inquired about the project’s funding.

Weston & Sampson’s project cost estimate is $445,000. “You’ll see that our cost estimate came out a little bit higher than what we’re asking for,” Recreation Director Kathryn Matthews said, adding that “it would be responsible of us to use the funding that’s already on the books and try to spend that down, incorporating that into this project.”

If additional funds for the project are needed, it could be supplemented through the use of the existing 2018 ADA Improvement Fund with permission from the Bourne Commission on Disabilities, Matthews said, adding that a request has been sent to the commission.

“The goal is to do this in one swing,” Matthews said.

“I’d rather have everything upfront,” Sampson said. He noted that he would “feel more comfortable if we had those actual figures.” Matthews directed Sampson to the itemized budget included in the application.

Due to the property’s historical significance, the Historical Commission’s approval was required, and the commission voted to recommend the project.

The Recreation Committee was also seeking $350,000 for the Bourne Community Center shade structures project. With the improvements to the Jason Comoletti basketball court, the new all-wheel skatepark and new playground underway, the committee requests these funds to provide two 15-foot cantilevered shade structures. This would also provide ADA-compliant seating and walkways.

Sampson inquired if natural shading had been looked at as an option as a lower-cost alternative. “I did not,” Matthews said, adding that the decision was based on public feedback for increased shade canopies and clear sight lines.

Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian and member Mary Jane Mastrangelo inquired about environmental logistics during the Select Board’s meeting on March 17. Matthews stated that the cantilevers will be permanently installed into the ground; however, the fabric could be taken off during winter and high-wind seasons.

Town Hall Facilities

Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem and Facilities Director Steven Gavazza have collaborated to request $77,000 for an evaluation of Bourne Town Hall, which would include design services and a pre-bid support package to address water damage and window, roof and facade repairs. It would also feature hazardous material testing, design development, contract procurement and field investigation.

Using funds allocated for roof designs for Town Hall, Fire Station 3 and the Veterans’ Memorial Community Center during the 2023 May Town Meeting, a leak study on Town Hall revealed that in addition to the roof, the building’s windows and walls were also experiencing water infiltration.

The total cost for the design services for the roof, walls, and windows of the town hall is $154,000. “Between this CPC request for $77,000 and the money that’s already been allocated in the roof article, that’ll provide the full funding for the design,” McCollem said.

The Historical Commission’s approval was required due to the property’s historical significance, which it granted as it voted to recommend the project.

Bourne Public Schools Director of Business Services Jordan Geist requested $30,000 for a feasibility study of the central school administration building at 36 Sandwich Road. The study would assess the siding and trim, which are both nearing the end of their useful lives; the front ramp and stairs, which are cracked; the rusted back entrance staircase; and water penetration at the back entrance.

Neither the Select Board or Finance Committee made a comment or question.

The Historical Commission recommended this project. Its approval was required due to the property’s historical significance.

Executive Director Mark Robinson of The Compact of Cape Cod Conservation Trusts, Inc., Bourne Conservation President Jack Dawley, and former president and trustee Steve Ballentive requested that the town purchase a conservation restriction for $325,000 for 940 County Road, a vacant wooded lot in Pocasset.

BCT, a private nonprofit group, acquired the 7.34-acre developable lot from its previous owner for $650,000 for conservation purposes. The trust’s interest in the property stemmed from its proximity to other current or future conservation areas.

The trust proposed a partnership with the Town of Bourne, under which Community Preservation Act (CPA) funds would be used to purchase a conservation restriction on the property, preserving it in perpetuity. Per the CPA, open space parcels must be owned by the town for conservation or recreational purposes or be owned by a nonprofit.

While understanding the logic of conserving land, Sampson stated his concern with the limited access to land for municipal needs. Finance Committee chairman James D. Sullivan noted that if BCT had not bought the land, it could have been developed or not remained available to the town as Sampson had suggested.

Finance Committee clerk Carla Emmons added that “buying up open land does limit us not just in the future, but limits any kind of real estate development.”

Noting the trade-off that exists between conserving open space and providing housing, Sullivan added, “there’s not necessarily a trade-off if you can infill areas that are already disturbed to build a house rather than a forested area that’s near the conservation area.”

‘It’s clear that it’s set out that it’s a shared purchase, that the town is purchasing about half the cost of the property,” Mastrangelo said. Siroonian noted, “We’re paying off their loan in the form of a conservation restriction.”

Both the Open Space Committee and Conservation Commission recommended the conservation restriction.

The Community Preservation Committee requested $75,000 for the CPC’s administrative and operating expenses for Fiscal Year 2027. Requested for the past five years, the funds cover the administrative services and costs, such as paying for an appraisal report. Remaining funds go back to Community Preservation Funds.

No comments or questions were made by either the Select Board or Finance Committee.

Siroonian recused herself from the presentations made by Housing Assistance Corporation (HAC) and the Bourne Affordable Housing Trust to avoid the appearance of conflict; she and her husband own ResCOM Architectural Incorporated and HAC is a client.

Patricia Mitrokostas, principal director of strategic funding for HAC, and Robert Brennan, chief legal officer at HAC, presented a request of $100,000 on behalf of HAC for the renovation of 460 West Main Street in Hyannis. The location would house the Assistance Resource Shelter, Cape Cod’s only state-licensed emergency overnight individual shelter, which is currently at 77 Winter Street in Hyannis. HAC is seeking $100,000 from every Cape town.

Operated by the Catholic Charities of the Diocese of Fall River, the new building would have 50 beds, 30 for men and 20 for women; triple the amount of program space compared to the current shelter; and a kitchen. Duffy Health Center would also be on-site to provide medical services and medications.

Sampson inquired about who would be served by the shelter. Brennan said that it would be used as a short-term shelter, ranging from one night to one to two weeks. Mitrokostas added that HAC’s outreach team, in collaboration with the Bourne Health Board and first responders, refers those who need assistance to the shelter. Duffy Health Center and Belonging With Each Other also assist in connecting people to the shelter.

Sullivan asked for a breakdown of the $4.8 million total cost. Mitrokostas stated that of that total $3 million of federal American Rescue Plan Act funds were used to buy 460 West Main Street, Mitrokostas said, adding that the remaining $1.8 million, composed of $100,000 from each Cape town and a $355,000 MassDevelopment grant, would be used only for the renovation of the building.

Mastrangelo said, “This sounds like a wonderful project.”

As the board’s representative to the Affordable Housing Trust, Select Board member Peter J. Meier said that the trust and the Housing Partnership voted unanimously to support the project.

Stating her appreciation for HAC’s work, Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti also inquired if the conditions proposed by Assistant Town Counsel Rian R. Holmquest had been accounted for. Sampson had a similar line of inquiry.

Brennan said that HAC “will be able to meet the conditions” that the CPC endorsed at its meeting on March 4. Holmquest’s conditions ranged from a non-discrimination request and a deed rider requiring that the property be used only for a shelter to setting a timeframe for the use of the allocated CPA funds and stipulations about the grant agreement.

In response to one of Holmquest’s conditions about the Town of Barnstable’s involvement with funding, Brennan said that since Barnstable “really shoulders uh the costs, the operational costs and burdens of having the shelter located within the town...[HAC] elected to, for the balance of funds, go out to the other 14 towns.”

Bertram said that the conditions would be addressed through the grant agreement, which is commonly used with CPA funds.

“From a legal standpoint, this project is fine with me,” Town Counsel Bryan F. Bertram stated on Tuesday. “It’s going to require a little work in the grant agreement phase to make sure we address the things that are important to making sure this works properly, but that’s really a question for the lawyers.” He added, “it’s not a reason, in my mind, to hold this up.”

Mastrangelo asked if the warrant article would require language outlining a contingency on the grant agreement satisfying the conditions. Bertram said that could be included in the article’s motion.

Brennan referenced the point-by-point discussion at the Community Preservation Committee meeting on March 6. “We’re absolutely amenable to all of the points that were raised,” he said, noting that the majority of the other towns have also asked for similar conditions.

Bourne Affordable Housing Trust chairwoman and Affordable Housing Partnership at-large member Susan Ross presented the partnership’s request for $111,500 to support its Fiscal Year 2027 budget and affordable housing services. The partnership is solely financed through CPA funds.

The funds would assist with purchasing housing, support legal fees and support continued monitoring by HAC of properties to ensure their affordability, inspections, contributions to home lotteries, grant writing and Cape Cod Commission assistance.
