Title: Proposed Repairs At Jonathan Bourne Historical Center Well-Received
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-04-17T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/proposed-repairs-at-jonathan-bourne-historical-center-well-received/article_fd23db93-ea2e-4316-8745-a5fab9a29fb8.html

Steps have been taken to address the water damage at the historic Jonathan Bourne Historical Center, as the historical center’s board of governors President William Prodouz updated the Select Board on the matter at its meeting on April 7.

Commissioned to be built as the town’s library in 1897 by Emily Howland Bourne in honor of her father—whaling tycoon and the building and town’s namesake, Jonathan Bourne—the building now serves the town as the town’s historical hub.

Prodouz explained that Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem had contacted Gale Associates, an engineering firm, last fall to evaluate the building. The town received a 43-page study report in February of this year, which outlined the firm’s observations of water infiltration and repair recommendations, and was reviewed by McCollem, the town and the board of governors.

Referred to as the “stop leak project,” the work would work to address the sources of the water infiltration in the building, as discerned by Gale Associates in their report.

Based on the report, the board of governors identified repairing the flat roof attachment between the original building and a 1954 addition, and the demolition and replacement of the original chimney to the roofline as “two top items.”

“The chimney has exceeded its serviceable life and should be demolished down to the roof deck and rebuilt to stop water infiltration,” Gale Associates stated in the report of the two aforementioned repairs. “The low-sloped rear addition roof is generally in a serviceable condition but requires immediate repairs to stop water infiltration.”

The next steps include developing a scope of work and a quote for the proposed project, Prodouz stated. McCollem added that the town’s Facilities Director Steven Gavazza, Prodouz and herself would continue to work together to put an “article on the Fall Town Meeting to fund the design work.”

Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo stated that the approach of addressing the “two important pieces…makes a lot of sense.” She added that developing a scope of the work “would be a good step.” Select Board clerk Jeanne L. Azarovitz agreed, stating that “everything is going in the right direction.”

Prodouz noted that he has “got wonderful support from everyone in this room, but also from all of the members of the board of governors.”

Located at 30 Keene Street, the building is leased by the Bourne Historical Society (BHS) from the Town of Bourne for a nominal fee; both share operating expenses. Overseeing the operation and use of the building is the board of governors, which is composed of representatives from BHS, the town and the Bourne Society for Historic Preservation.

The building also houses the offices of the Bourne Historical Commission and Bourne Archives, in addition to BHS and the Bourne Society for Historic Preservation.

“I’m glad that we are doing something because it is a crown jewel,” Select Board member Peter J. Meier stated.

Designated on the National Register of Historical Places, the building was designed by Henry Vaughan, who was famous for his design of the Washington National Cathedral, the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in New York and the New Bedford Whaling Museum. The red slate roof and yellow tapestry brick are combined with Colonial Revival and English Gothic motifs, a style which the architect is credited with introducing to North America, including Palladian windows and a large stained glass panel by Clayton & Bell of London, depicting St. George and the dragon.

“We don’t have many places in town that show our heritage or our old town history; this is one of them. And we should try to preserve it as much as we can because once it is gone, we cannot get it back,” Meier said.

“This is also a perfect example of deferred maintenance,” he added. “You can only defer so far and then after a while the problem is a lot bigger than it had to be in the past.”

Meier inquired if any temporary remedies can be taken in the meantime. “We have tried to patch it a couple times,” McCollem replied. “It really does need to be designed properly and then reconstructed.”

Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti noted that “it is certainly time” for the proposed project, referencing the photos in Gale’s report as well as her own experience during a visit to the building. “It definitely needs some TLC and some love.”

Agreeing with Ferretti, Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian said, “It was very difficult to look at those images of that historical building and the damage caused by water.”

She added that she appreciated the board of governors “becoming more vocal and putting a path forward” for the building.
