Title: Road Closures Announced For Bourne's Fourth Of July Parade, Police Chief Shares Safety Reminders
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-03T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/road-closures-announced-for-bournes-fourth-of-july-parade-police-chief-shares-safety-reminders/article_a537ae3a-1a6c-4bef-958f-667a56ebd620.html

With the summer season revving up and the upcoming Fourth of July celebrations on Saturday, Bourne Police Chief Brandon M. Esip presented safety reminders and upcoming temporary road closures at the Select Board’s meeting on Tuesday , June 30 .

Since the Fourth of July parade will run along Main Street in Buzzards Bay, certain roads in the road will experience temporary closures.

Main Street from the West Rotary to Perry Avenue and the St. Margaret Street bypass to Main Street will be closed starting at 9:15 AM and no cars will be allowed to park on those roads.

Washington Street and Cohasset Avenue will be closed starting at 8:15 AM since both serve as the staging area for the parade. Only vehicles involved in the parade will be allowed on those roads.

No parking will be allowed on Main Street, Perry Avenue, Cohasset Avenue and Washington Street. This will go into effect starting at 12 AM on Saturday morning, Esip said in a phone call with the Enterprise on Wednesday, July 1.

With the parade lasting from 10 AM to noon, the roads will be reopened as soon as the roads have been cleared after the parade, Esip stated. He noted that the Police Department will share maps and other information, such as when the roads are reopened, on its Facebook page.

With summer in session, Esip shared that residents should anticipate seeing additional officers on foot, e-bikes and ATVs in “high areas” throughout the town who will be “monitoring for disorderly conduct, disruptive behavior” for which there is “zero tolerance.”

Public use of marijuana will not be allowed and may be subject to citation, and underage drinking is also not allowed, he stated.

Fires and grills on beaches are also prohibited as stated in the town’s bylaws, Esip said, adding that when people burn wood pallets on the beach, hundreds of nails are left behind in the sand.

The police will also continue to enforce beach stickers. Esip added that the town’s two community service officers have issued 105 citations as of Tuesday since the beginning of June, the majority of which are due to cars not having beach stickers.

“Please get your beach stickers,” Esip added. “It’s a little cheaper than getting a ticket.”

“We want people to enjoy the great resources, but we wanted to make sure they’re doing it safely, and they are assisted as best as possible,” Esip said.

Esip also addressed the complaints that the Police Department has received in regard to the “unsafe operation” of e-bikes.

Massachusetts law currently classifies e-bikes into two classes, both of which “max out at 20 miles per hour,” Esip said. “Anything that goes over 20 miles per hour is not considered an e-bike in Massachusetts and you must have a driver’s license to operate. They must also be registered and you must have a helmet.”

Noting that most bike helmets are tested for 14-mile-per-hour crashes,” Esip recommended that people “think about the helmet you are providing for the bike” and “check your bikes before you purchase” for the bike’s maximum speed.

He also reminded the public of the “rules and regulations of the roads” for all bikes, “which means stopping at the stop signs, stopping for red lights on sidewalks in a non-business area, that means yielding to pedestrians, in a business area you cannot operate on the sidewalks.”

Select Board members shared personal accounts of encounters with people improperly operating on e-bikes and stated their appreciation to the chief for his and the Police Department’s efforts.

“Just be safe out there,” Esip said, adding that the Police Department is “just making sure everyone is enjoying the summer and getting home safely.”
