Title: Road Repairs Begin At Barlows Landing, Shore Road Intersection
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-13T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/road-repairs-begin-at-barlows-landing-shore-road-intersection/article_c830284f-af65-411d-99ba-86877bab3cbe.html

The Department of Public Works (DPW) began road work at the intersection of Barlows Landing Road and Shore Road on Monday , May 11 . Major road improvements will be conducted Monday through Friday from 7 AM to 4 PM. The work is anticipated to be “substantially complete” by Friday, June 26.

Drivers and abutters can expect temporary traffic delays, uneven trenches and elevated noise. Temporary sidewalk ramps, closures and detours are also to be expected.

A notice by the DPW states that while “vehicular access to the residences and businesses in the area will be maintained throughout construction,” residents and visitors should plan for delays.

Boat haulers utilizing the Barlows Landing ramp, which will remain open, should also plan ahead, as turning areas will be reduced while construction equipment is in the roadway. It is recommended that trailers heading toward the Barlows Landing boat ramp enter the intersection straight-on from the east on Barlows Landing Road.

The project includes the construction of an all-way stop, new pedestrian curb ramps, asphalt paving and crosswalk markings, as well as minor drainage updates.

Town Meeting voters approved the appropriation of $423,000 in funds for the design, construction and oversight of the project in May 2025.

In conjunction with the Engineering Department, the DPW retained Apex Companies, LLC for engineering services for the new design of the project.

Publicly bid in December, Mass Pavement Reclamation Inc. of Marshfield, the lowest bidder, was chosen for the construction portion of the project.

The DPW will have staff on-site to assist with addressing concerns and monitoring the construction. Police officers, road flaggers and signage will direct pedestrians and vehicular traffic while the construction is ongoing.

Members of the public seeking additional information on this project or encountering issues that need to be addressed during construction can reach out to DPW Director Matthew Sawicki at 508-759-0600, extension 3225, or msawicki@bourne-ma.gov ; or Assistant Director Matthew Quinn at the aforementioned number with the extension 3224 or mquinn@bourne-ma.gov , the notice states.
