Title: Sampson Selected By Bourne Select Board As New Town Moderator
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-24T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/sampson-selected-by-bourne-select-board-as-new-town-moderator/article_f2912034-4aa3-4de6-b85e-7863df23d2e3.html

Arthur Wayne Sampson will serve as Bourne’s town moderator until the town’s annual election next spring after the Select Board unanimously voted to affirm his nomination at its meeting on Tuesday , July 21 .

With the Select Board voting unanimously on June 9 to open a 30-day period for letters of intent to be submitted for the position of town moderator, Sampson was the sole applicant expressing interest in fulfilling the role.

Town moderator is an elected position in Bourne. The town moderator is responsible for moderating Town Meetings as well as appointing the Finance Committee.

Prior to the town’s election cycle this past spring, former town moderator Amy B. Kullar had announced that she would not be running for reelection. With no official candidates on the ballot, Bourne residents wrote in names. Despite stating that she would not run again, Kullar still received the majority of write-ins; she declined the position.

With more than 50 years of experience working either for or consulting with municipalities, Sampson said his “passion for working for municipalities has not changed.”

Town Meeting experience is something Sampson is not short of either, as over the course of those five decades he also served as a Town Meeting member in Bourne and in the town he lived in prior to moving to Bourne.

“Town Meeting has been at the forefront of everything that I’ve always done, participated in and been very transparent with people and what’s going on,” he added.

As a member of the Bourne Finance Committee, he serves as the committee’s representative on the Capital Outlay Committee and the South Side Fire Station Building Committee. Sampson is also the Town of Bourne’s representative on the Barnstable County Assembly of Delegates.

“To even avoid the appearance of a conflict of interest, I think it’s appropriate that, if selected, I would step down from all of my other commitments,” he said.

After Sampson completed his speech, Select Board members shared their thoughts.

Citing her experience working with Sampson, Select Board member Jeanne L. Azarovitz said it “is great” that he stepped up as a candidate for the position.

In response to Azarovitz inquiring whether he would have a deputy assist him as he moderated Town Meeting for the first time, Sampson said that since he is not yet appointed, he has not “thought that far yet.” However, he shared that he would “certainly take that as a possibility” and had scheduled to meet with town counsel to discuss legal advice.

Sampson added that he would also “immediately” enroll in training sessions offered by the Massachusetts Moderators Association prior to moderating Fall Town Meeting.

Expressing her thanks for Sampson’s interest in serving as town moderator, Select Board clerk Mary Jane Mastrangelo noted that it will leave an “important vacancy on the Finance Committee.”

Sampson acknowledged that his departure from the committee would increase the number of vacant seats to five. Only four of the committee’s nine total seats would be filled. “My resignation will actually put them one below the quorum,” he noted.

Sampson shared that “there have been some applications” by those interested in serving on the committee. “As a member of the Finance Committee, I’ve already reached out to four of those people and three of them are willing to serve,” he said. “If selected, I’ll be able to make some appointments right away to get the Finance Committee back up to work.”

Select Board member Peter J. Meier thanked Sampson for his civic involvement in the Town of Bourne, noting that it will be a “different challenge” to serve as town moderator.

“It is hard to get people to run or write letters to apply for appointment for any of these committees these days,” Meier noted. “So, the fact that you are doing this, I am very appreciative and I am sure we will be in good hands.”

After Azarovitz seconded a motion made by Mastrangelo to nominate Sampson as Bourne’s town moderator until next election, the board voted unanimously in the affirmative.

The next order of business for the board was to confirm the date of the upcoming Fall Town Meeting. Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti noted that Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem had verified that Sampson is available to serve as town moderator at Fall Town Meeting on October 19.

To make it official, the board unanimously approved a motion made by Meier to schedule Fall Town Meeting on October 19, after board chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian seconded it.
