Title: Sandwich Road Near Mid-Cape Connector Reopened After Truck Hit Pole
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-03-30T09:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/sandwich-road-near-mid-cape-connector-reopened-after-truck-hit-pole/article_5bace30a-08d9-4aa5-9d48-ab5bb000a89b.html

Around 5:10 PM on Sunday, March 29, Bourne Fire and Police departments and Massachusetts State Police responded to a report of a single-car, motor-vehicle accident near Autumn Way on Sandwich Road. A truck allegedly hit a utility pole, causing the pole and lines to fall across the street and potentially entrapping the driver.

Sandwich Road, in the area of the Mid Cape Connector, remains closed in both directions as repairs continue to be made to the utility pole. "Road expected to be reopened by 8 AM," Bourne Police Department stated in a Facebook post on Monday morning, March 30. The road reopened at 8:20 AM.

Upon arriving at the scene, responders found a black 2012 Chevrolet Silverado facing eastbound in the westbound lane of travel. The vehicle “sustained significant damage and was entangled in the power lines from the downed utility pole,” the Bourne Police Department stated in a press release. The vehicle was towed from the scene.

The driver, a 36-year-old male from Brewster, was the only occupant in the vehicle and was able to remove himself from the vehicle. After being assessed by Bourne Fire and Rescue, he was transported to an area hospital for minor injuries.

“The Bourne Police investigation determined that the operator of the pickup truck was impaired by drug use and was using their mobile phone,” the press release stated, adding that the driver will be charged with a subsequent offense of operating under the influence of drugs, negligent operation, marked lanes violation, failure to wear a seatbelt and hands free mobile phone violation.

The Massachusetts Department of Transportation and Massachusetts State Police assisted with redirecting traffic. Eversource and Comcast worked to shut off power to the affected line.
