Title: Select Board Questions UCT Enrollment Discrepancies
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-03-06T00:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/select-board-questions-uct-enrollment-discrepancies/article_e50891e5-a076-4943-9aac-2edcb258f899.html

With the Bourne Fiscal Year 2027 budget in flux and experiencing shortfalls, the Select Board on Tuesday , March 3, had a discussion with Upper Cape Cod Regional Technical School (UCT) Superintendent Roger Forget about enrollment.

UCT’s assessment for Bourne’s FY27 budget sits at $4,438,051, an increase of $346,933 from FY26. Forget said he will present the budget at the Finance Committee meeting on Monday, March 16.

The budget had initially increased to $4,688,687 after Forget informed Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem and Finance Director Erica Flemming on February 3 that, upon his review of the preliminary cherry sheets, the proposed budget for UCT was “approximately $380,000 short for FY27.” On Monday, Forget informed McCollem that the budget decreased by $250,636.

That was due to a discrepancy with 14 students who do not live in Bourne being labeled as Bourne students. Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo asked for clarification on how that happened. “I don’t know if we can fix it for this budget, but it is something that we should discuss, because it’s also a problem with motor vehicle excise [tax],” she said. “I need to know the whole budget scenario.”

“For me, it’s a nonnegotiable as far as expending taxpayers’ dollars on students that don’t live in Bourne,” Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian said, to which Forget said he agrees.

Forget said a list of 17 UCT students had been flagged due to the aforementioned reason; only three of those 17 are Bourne residents and the remaining 14 students are Wareham residents. The Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE) was notified and it corrected the students’ town of residence. An additional 12 students were identified thereafter for the same reason.

“How do you determine and how do we tell DESE [the students] don’t live here, or maybe they do live here,” Siroonian asked, adding she noticed some addresses on the list that were not in Bourne.

Since UCT did not cause the situation, it is a town issue, Forget said; the list was produced after he sent McCollem the 17 students’ addresses for verification. After it was learned that 14 of those students were Wareham residents, Forget shared the list with the Town of Wareham to confirm. After receiving confirmation from both towns that those 14 addresses were in Wareham, he notified Robert F. O’Donnell, director of school finance at DESE. Forget added that parents of UCT students attest to their addresses.

Pointing out that Buzzards Bay and Wareham share the same ZIP Code of 02532, Forget proposed a long-term solution of adding an additional number segment to the ZIP Code to differentiate between the two. His proposed solution for next year is to validate addresses by giving towns a complete list of students’ addresses by September 1 or earlier to verify.

If a correction were to be required, Forget said, he would work through DESE to correct the address associated with a student’s State Assigned Student Identifier (SASID) number, which “is a unique identifier given to each student receiving a publicly funded education in Massachusetts,” as stated by DESE.

When students who live in Wareham but attend Bourne Middle School through School Choice apply to UCT, their SASID connects them to Bourne Public Schools. This results in an error message, he said.

This discrepancy “accounts for a lot of money and we’re in deficit,” Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti said.

“How do we notify DESE?” Siroonian asked.

Forget said he notified O’Donnell of the discrepancies, and said “[O’Donnell] will not do anything with it…unless both towns validate the addresses in the town.” He added that it is not under UCT’s purview but rather under the towns of Bourne and Wareham.

“If you’re claiming these as students, then it is, right?” Siroonian asked.

“I’m not making them from Bourne. The Department of Education is saying they are from Bourne,” Forget said.

“But you’re counting them, as Bourne students, right?” Siroonian asked.

“This is not Upper Cape Tech identifying and saying that you are a Bourne student. That’s not what happens,” Forget replied. “It comes from the Department of Education.”

“With the parent that signs the attestation, correct,” Ferretti said.

“That’s correct,” Forget said.

Bourne School Committee chairwoman Donel Beals asked who inputs the students into the system. Once UCT puts the students in the system, the DESE verifies the information and sends it back to UCT, Forget said.

While Siroonian proposed that the Select Board send a letter to DESE to address the issue, Siroonian, Beals and Forget all agreed that it does not completely rectify the situation. In addition to solving the issue at hand, Forget reiterated that addressing the joint ZIP Code between Buzzards Bay and Wareham could also solve similar issues that arise with real estate transactions and excise taxes in that area.

Beals asked if UCT “could take a deeper dive when they’re inputting” the students. Forget reiterated that the solution for next year is “to provide the addresses and allow the assessor’s office to say, ‘These are all the addresses that are within; these are not.’”

He would then share the addresses that the Bourne assessor’s office tagged as not in Bourne, with the towns where the street is actually located. Forget said that even after these corrections are made, he would still “have to sit with the SASID person at DESE to change that so that it is noted in the SASID system.”

Siroonian asked if the 12 additional students are flagged because the Town of Bourne knows they are not Bourne residents, or if it is because DESE does not know that yet, or has not made that change yet. Forget said DESE is aware of those addresses but has not made the change.

“Why?” Siroonian asked. “We somehow need to rectify this. This is a lot of money.” She then proposed sending a letter to DESE and Bourne constituents and sending a copy of the letter to the Town of Wareham, which Forget said he would sign as well. “This is a real issue here and it has a huge impact on our budgets,” Siroonian said before asking McCollem for her recommendations.

February “is the very first time this has been raised as a town issue because we have never been asked to look at any addresses before,” McCollem said. “I do not agree that we need Wareham’s permission to say that these are not Town of Bourne residents. These addresses do not receive property tax bills from the Town of Bourne.”

“I want DESE to rectify this because they’re the decision maker and number giver,” Siroonian said.

McCollem recommended that the Select Board draft a letter to tell DESE to recalculate the 12 additional students to properly reflect the town in which they live. “Erica [Flemming] and I can certainly write a letter explaining why we are saying that these students do not belong in the Town of Bourne’s assessment,” she said.

Beals asked if the Town of Bourne would retroactively receive money to compensate for prior occasions where the town had unknowingly been paying for a student who was not from Bourne. Forget said it could potentially be done but due to how the budgets are structured, “you can’t retro backwards,” and it would be a “daunting task for the assessor’s office to go through and identify” prior instances, asking, “How far back are you going?”

Ferretti and Siroonian acknowledged Beals’ question, with Siroonian adding that the letter should include feedback to DESE to improve the process. “I agree. The SASID system that is in place is not a good one because we’re not the only town or school district that this has happened to,” she said.

Mastrangelo suggested examining how the distinction is made between Buzzards Bay and Wareham residents regarding excise taxes in order to potentially utilize the same strategy to differentiate the Buzzards Bay and Wareham students.

She also added, citing the general issues arising from the two towns sharing ZIP Codes, that “we have to make sure we get our proper revenue or don’t get expensed for these that are not our obligation…what is the situation. What’s causing it? And how can we solve it?”

The board voted 5-0 to have McCollem and Flemming draft a letter for Ferretti to sign, informing Bourne constituents and O’Donnell at DESE of the situation. A copy of the letter would also be sent to state Representatives Steven G. Xiarhos (R-5th Barnstable) and David T. Vieira (R-3rd Barnstable), and state Senator Dylan A. Fernandes (D-Plymouth and Barnstable), since O’Donnell had sent the state budget to the Legislature and it is currently in Ways and Means.
