Title: Sunset Acres Road Repair Petition Continues
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-01-16T00:00:00-05:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/sunset-acres-road-repair-petition-continues/article_9f8e9e87-f845-46b8-b673-2c92c6a6a32a.html

Town Engineer Timothy Lydon returned to the Select Board on Tuesday , January 13, to continue a presentation about a petition to repair Tara Terrace, Eldridge Street and Eldridge Street Extension in the Sunset Acres I and II subdivisions.

While these are all private residential roads, meaning homeowners would usually be responsible for them, the Engineering Department received a petition over the summer with more than 50% of signatures requesting a temporary repair of the streets.

These petitions, which demonstrate that the majority of residents support the town performing temporary repairs along the roads, are a legal requirement for the project getting off the ground. This “temporary repair” would allow the town to step in and handle construction.

Wanting to focus on discussing what the work would entail, Lydon explained that “there are areas of major disrepair for Eldridge Street as well as Tara Terrace. There’s sunken utility lines that were not back-filled properly or frost-heaving that went from a smaller pothole to a very large pothole.”

“I will say that the full depth reclamation that we are doing on Eldridge Street, is almost equal to the full depth reclamation we will be doing on Tara Terrace. So I wanted that to be clear. Outside of this, this is not just a pothole repair project,” Lydon said. “We will be doing a two-inch mill and overlay throughout the entire project. So, at the end of the day, this will be a brand-new road.”

Lydon highlighted two caveats for what the work could entail: the drainage cleaning and catch basin adjustments. He also noted that the scope of this potential work will not be known until the roads are opened up.

“We have that all built into this cost,” Lydon said of the caveats. “ Everyone will be paying a proportional amount based on their frontage to the overall linear frontage of the project.”

Lydon said there were several meetings with the liaison group, highlighting that it was the most he has met with a group for a veteran project, which gave “a lot of opportunity to have dialogue.”

The Select Board members shared their appreciation for the work of those involved in the petition to improve safety, but also acknowledged the potential financial impacts on some residents.

“I just wanted to say thank you very much for the additional information in the packet about the extent of the work with the mill and overlay and the detailed explanation of what is involved,” Select Board member Mary Jane Mastrangelo said. “ I think that really helps understand what the project is and how much of a repair it is, that will really benefit the neighborhood.”

“We’re doing this for public safety reasons,” Select Board member Peter J. Meier said. “We will make sure that throughout the process of doing this work that we will save the taxpayers as much money.”

Select Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti also acknowledged the price. “I know there’s some residents that weren’t for it because of the sticker shock…we do understand that,” Ferretti said. “In the end, Town Meeting decides.”

“You’ve had a lot of conversation, and you did due diligence,” Select Board vice chairwoman Anne-Marie G. Siroonian said. “I know there is some contingency in the other 30%, which allows the residents an opportunity to really manage the project within their finances because this is going to be a hit to people.”

“Let me ask you this, is [the Department of Public Works] going to be doing some of the work on this project and then it’s outsourced for actual paving?” Siroonian said.

“We will be doing all of the bidding and the catch basin cleaning,” DPW Director Matt Sawacki said. “At the end of the project we may do some of the loam and seeding depending on the extent of what work is necessary. This will also help save the residents some money.”

The Select Board voted unanimously to “place an article on the Annual Town Meeting warrant to appropriate the sum of $1,038,373.70 for the purpose of temporary repairs and resurfacing of Tara Terrace, Eldridge Street, and Eldridge Street Extension, in Monument Beach, finding such repairs are required by the public necessity and convenience.”

The board also authorized the borrowing of the sum and the issuance of bonds or notes of the town, as well as that said funds are to be repaid to the Town of Bourne through a betterment assessment.

The approval was met with applause by the approximately 50 residents who attended the meeting.

However, while the Select Board had already moved on to succeeding agenda items, several residents of Eldridge Street and Tara Terrace arrived at the meeting at 7 PM; they had received a notice from the town stating that the matter would be discussed at that time. However, the agenda item had been discussed and voted on well before that time. Upon learning that the vote had already been taken they expressed confusion, with some sharing their irritation.

“If we need to bring that back for another vote from the board, we’ll work with the town counsel to confirm if that needs to happen,” Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem said.

Ferretti explained the events leading up to the vote. “They were all here, the proponents, the ones who wrote the letters. We have an overwhelming amount of letters that we received in support of the project. …They did all the due diligence…they did check all the dots. It was a full petition, and the Select Board had to hear it because they did what they were supposed to do to get it done. So we apologize on the time.”

Lydon returned to the podium to share with residents that he would be outside the meeting room to resolve the misunderstanding. The remaining audience members joined him.
