Title: Survey Seeks Input From Bourne Residents Ages 60+ On Community Needs
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-06-03T13:15:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/briefs/survey-seeks-input-from-bourne-residents-ages-60-on-community-needs/article_027ba0b6-08d7-43b3-879f-13a03da04a43.html

Bourne residents over the age of 60 will have a chance to voice and share their experiences with the Town of Bourne and the Council on Aging (COA) throughout June.

In partnership with the Center for Social and Demographic Research on Aging at the Gerontology Institute at the University of Massachusetts Boston, the Town of Bourne has developed a survey to “identify the current and long-term needs and preferences of the Bourne residents aged 60+,” COA Director Debora Oliviere said. “And to inform the Council on Aging and the Town of Bourne in developing services, programs and policies that support Bourne’s large and growing population.”

According to the town clerk’s office, 8,300 residents of the town’s total population of 21,000 are registered voters aged 60 or older, Oliviere stated. This is approximately 39.5% of the population.

This past week, surveys were sent via mail to those 8,300 residents. Since Monday, June 1, the survey has been available online on the town’s website. Hard copies can be found at the Town Hall, Council on Aging and the library. A drop box has been provided at those three locations for convenience. The deadline to submit the survey is Wednesday, July 1.

“We are hoping to give the older adults a voice in the direction the Council on Aging should take with future planning,” Oliviere said. “Currently, we have four generations over the age of 60 with very different ideas, needs and aspirations. It is our mission to enhance the quality of life for all of our seniors.”

After searching for organizations that “specifically studied older adults in the commonwealth” and reviewing previous experiences of other communities that had partnered with the Center for Social and Demographic Research on Aging, Oliviere and the COA Advisory Board decided to collaborate with the center.

The center assists communities throughout the commonwealth in gaining a better understanding of their residents’ experiences, needs, and preferences by gathering and analyzing resident feedback and data. Although the center primarily researches older adults, it has increasingly examined “people across the lifespan,” said Caitlin Coyle, director of the Center for Social and Demographic Research on Aging. This research allows communities to make policy, program or investment decisions based on information that reflects the town’s specific circumstances.

Coyle has a doctorate in gerontology, which is the study of the social, psychological, and biological aspects of aging. She said that the center’s “research focuses on issues like aging, caregiving, economic security, transportation, housing, social connection, community well-being, and access to services.”

“One of the core ideas that guides our work is that aging well is not simply an individual responsibility; it is a community outcome,” Coyle said. “People’s ability to thrive as they age depends on a wide range of systems working together, including housing, transportation, healthcare, social connections, economic security, public spaces, and community services. Our research helps communities understand how these factors interact and where investments can have the greatest impact.”

How well these systems address the community’s needs will be assessed through the survey, with its questions reflecting those key topics. The survey was developed by Coyle, her team, and a COA sub-committee, who tailored the questions to Bourne.

After the survey closes on July 1, its results will be analyzed to “identify key themes, community strengths, concerns and priorities,” Coyle said, adding that this may reveal patterns in the data.

In addition to gathering data, Oliviere noted that the center will also “interview key informants in the community, conduct focus groups, prepare a detailed analysis and demographic profile, and submit a final report to the Select Board and community.”

These results will serve as testimony, supporting the COA when it seeks to expand capital projects and services, applies for grants, requests its budget, and develops its five-year department strategy plan during each budget season, Oliviere said. It assists in “future municipal and strategic planning,” she said.

This needs assessment is largely paid for through grant funding obtained by the COA, with the town’s budget providing some support as well, Oliviere said.

A community needs assessment “will give older adults a voice in the planning by communicating what they actually want and need, rather than assumptions,” Oliviere said. “It allows seniors to participate in shaping the services and policies that affect their lives.”

Oliviere added that the data “provides the factual foundation for making informed decisions, ensuring resources are directed where they are needed most, and helping communities create programs and services that allow older adults to age safely, independently, and with a high quality of life.”

Coyle echoed the importance of conducting a community needs assessment as it gives “people a chance to have a voice in shaping the future of their town.”

“At a time when communities are facing changing demographics, rising costs and evolving service needs, having local data is incredibly valuable. It helps ensure that planning efforts are responsive to the people who actually live there and recognizes that creating a community where people can age well requires attention to many interconnected systems, not just one,” Coyle stated.

“The more voices we hear, the better the community will understand the range of experiences and perspectives that exist across Bourne,” Coyle added, emphasizing the importance of participation in the survey. “Whether someone has lived in Bourne for six months or 60 years, their experience matters, and we hope residents will take the opportunity to participate.”

For more information about the survey, visit bourne-ma.gov/m/newsflash/home/detail/44 . For questions, contact Oliviere at 508-759-0600, extension 5226, or doliviere@bourne-ma.gov .
