Title: Town Of Bourne And BCT Collaborate On Open Space Parcels
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-15T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/town-of-bourne-and-bct-collaborate-on-open-space-parcels/article_c4d5d991-4bf0-42c5-9cfe-cdc64e8514e0.html

The Bourne Conservation Trust (BCT) and the Town of Bourne are continuing their collaboration in conserving open spaces throughout the town.

At its meeting on Tuesday , May 12 , the Select Board voted to grant BCT, a local, private nonprofit organization, the conservation restrictions (CRs) for the following 14 town-owned parcels: 10 Aptucxet Road; 19, 20, 21 and 25 Sandy Pond Road; 199 Herring Pond Road; 188 County Road; 285 Head of the Bay Road; 0 Monument Neck Road; 0 County Road; 12 Thom Avenue; 212 Main Street; 3 Hersey Lane; and 0 Plymouth Lane.

The BCT was founded “with the idea of preserving some of the remaining large tracts of land and or of encouraging thoughtful conservative development in the town of Bourne,” its website states.

The town had acquired these 14 parcels using Community Preservation Act (CPA) funds over the course of many years for the purpose of conserving them as open space, having received approval and authorization to do so at Town Meetings spanning from October 2005 to June 2020.

Town-owned lands that are purchased as open space through CPA funds must have a third party hold a perpetual conservation restriction on the property, CPA regulations state.

Granting the conservation restrictions to BCT “will bring the town into compliance with the CPA regulations,” Mark H. Robinson, executive director of The Compact of Cape Cod Conservation Trusts, Inc, said in an email to the Enterprise. He had been working with the town on the process.

The Compact, according to its website, “provides technical assistance to 30 local and regional land trusts operating on Cape Cod, contracts with Cape Cod towns for their municipal open space projects, and serves as a national model of regional cooperation for land trusts.”

Through this partnership, the town retains title of all 14 properties, “subject to the overlay of protection afforded by the [conservation restriction] held by BCT,” Robinson wrote.

This means that while the town owns and manages the land for passive recreation and conservation, the trust monitors it to ensure it is being “kept in a natural state and used for conservation,” he explained. “If the Town tried to use the land for a non-conservation purpose, the BCT has legal standing to enforce the terms of the CR in court, if necessary.”

The process required the Conservation Commission to approve granting the conservation restrictions for the 14 properties to the conservation trust, which it gave at its meeting on April 16.

“It still needs approval by the state, presumably within a month,” Robinson wrote. “Then it gets recorded in the Registry of Deeds.”

The Select Board unanimously approved a motion that the “Select Board grant the conservation restriction to the Bourne Conservation Trust on multiple parcels, as identified herein, and approve the restriction in the public interest,” as stated by Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem.
