Title: Updates To Buzzards Bay Wastewater Treatment Facility Complete
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-06-26T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/updates-to-buzzards-bay-wastewater-treatment-facility-complete/article_616d292c-ff84-4b03-a15e-daedd8f984d0.html

A status update on the Buzzards Bay Wastewater Treatment Facility was provided to the Bourne Board of Sewer Commissioners by Public Works Director Matthew Sawicki on Tuesday , June 23 , after Kubota USA, the manufacturer of the facility’s membrane bioreactor, conducted a trial run in the beginning of May after some updates were made at the facility.

“It’s pretty much a brand new plant at this point,” Sawicki said. “And it should run like one, too.”

The facility was reseeded on Tuesday and “will start taking flow on Thursday or Friday,” Sawicki shared. Reseeding a wastewater facility involves introducing active, healthy microorganisms into the treatment system to jump-start it.

He added that chemicals will be added to counteract quaternary ammonium compounds, “which should eliminate all of our foaming issues and bacteriological issues in the plant.”

Quaternary ammonium compounds are “found in every cleaning agent.” When the chemical is washed down the drain, enters and “builds up” in the wastewater treatment system, it “breaks down the healthy bacteria in the treatment plant” that helps treat the wastewater, Sawicki told the Enterprise on Thursday, June 25.

Weston & Sampson, the engineering firm hired by the town to operate and maintain the plant, “did a really good job getting it to where it needs to be,” Sawicki noted.

At its last meeting , the Sewer Commissioners had voted to authorize Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem to accept Weston & Sampson’s bid for the Buzzards Bay Wastewater Treatment Facility’s updated contract and maintenance services. The engineering and environmental consulting firm had been the facility’s operator prior to this new contract.

“I think the new [operations and maintenance] agreement we have going is going to be a huge help, just adding the additional funding and staff hours to keep up with the O&M of the plant,” Sawicki stated. “It’s allowing us to monitor it much more closely also.”

He added, “I truly hope that we’ve seen the end of all the issues and that this will run the way it’s supposed to run.”

Sawicki did note that, as of Tuesday, the town had not received Kubota’s report “based on their finding and the conditions of the membranes” after their visit to the treatment facility.

Board clerk Mary Jane Mastrangelo inquired whether the report would feature Kubota’s recommendations, to which Sawicki replied that it is his understanding that it will provide recommendations “on the life of the membranes and also if they want to make any changes to the operations with the data that they have.”

Sawicki added that he would contact Kubota to see if the Sewer Commission could obtain the report in time for its next meeting in July.
