Title: Upper Cape Tech Looks To Replace Roof, Build New Gym
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-05-29T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/upper-cape-tech-looks-to-replace-roof-build-new-gym/article_d910d523-80ed-4add-9573-4c1fe1bd64bf.html

Upper Cape Cod Regional Technical School (UCT) has been accepted into the Massachusetts School Building Authority (MSBA) subsidy program, marking a major step forward in securing funds for a new roof for the school’s main building and a new gymnasium. The state program will help offset the cost of the project, but the sending towns will be responsible for covering the portion not reimbursed by the MSBA.

The roof is 27 years old and nearing the end of its useful life. The gymnasium, built in 1969 for an enrollment of about 500 students, now serves nearly 900 students.

UCT serves students from Bourne, Falmouth, Sandwich, Marion and Wareham who pursue vocational education. Those communities are referred to as sending towns.

The MSBA is “a quasi-independent government authority created to reform the process of funding capital improvement projects in the Commonwealth’s public schools,” its website states.

UCT Superintendent Roger Forget said the school applied for the subsidy two years ago and had submitted applications for many years prior.

In addition to the roof and gymnasium work, the project might include upgrades such as a fire suppression system, improved ventilation and measures to reduce the school’s carbon footprint. The existing gym would also be renovated into an additional cafeteria space to help accommodate growing enrollment.

At a Falmouth Finance Committee meeting on May 6, committee members said Forget had shared a rough project estimate with them that ranged from $100 million to $150 million. That figure is expected to change as design details are finalized and construction costs evolve over the next couple of years.

A more precise total, along with each sending town’s share of the cost, will be presented in approximately 1½ to two years when a final design is selected. That breakdown will reflect both MSBA reimbursement and the remaining local share, which will be apportioned among the sending towns based on student enrollment.

Until then, UCT has established a Building Committee that will oversee the early stages of the project, including hiring an Owner’s Project Manager (OPM) and a designer as part of the MSBA enrollment process.

The committee includes administrators from Sandwich, Bourne and Wareham, Select Board members from sending towns, community representatives, and individuals with construction and engineering experience. It will develop a request for proposals for the OPM and submit it to MSBA for review. An advertisement for additional committee members had been published previously.

Once approved by the MSBA, the committee will interview candidates and select an OPM, a process expected to continue into the fall. A similar process will follow for selecting a designer, likely extending through the winter and into spring.

Forget noted that a list of MSBA-approved OPMs and designers will guide both hiring processes. The selected designer will then develop a project plan for review by the Building Committee and eventual approval by the UCT School Committee.

“We have put some very small amounts aside, enough to pay for the OPM and to pay for the designer, and get them on board, so there’s no cost to the towns at this point in time,” Forget said. The sending towns have “actually made that investment over the years for the last 10 years,” he added, referencing how UCT has included requests for money to the capital roof stabilization fund during its annual capital budget presentation to the sending towns.

Forget emphasized that the towns will remain involved at “each step of the way” and said the goal is to remain “transparent” and “upfront” with the community throughout the process.
