Title: Watershed Permits Process Continues For Bourne Select Board
Author: HELEN SIEVERT
Date: 2026-07-24T00:00:00-04:00
URL: https://www.capenews.net/bourne/news/watershed-permits-process-continues-for-bourne-select-board/article_f75feb22-4954-4f3d-97cf-207c4eb62867.html

The Bourne Select Board heard updates about the watershed permit application processes for Bourne’s two watershed areas—Phinneys Harbor and Megansett Squeteague Harbor from Town Administrator Marlene V. McCollem at its meeting on Tuesday , July 21 .

Select Board members Jeanne L. Azarovitz and Peter J. Meier and chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti were present, as both clerk Mary Jane Mastrangelo and vice chairwoman Anne-Marie Siroonian recused themselves from the discussion as both live in the watersheds.

The first update was in regard to the expiration of a grant, which would cover the process of hiring an engineering firm to provide expert assistance with completing the required technical and scientific documentation included in the permit application process.

The Town of Bourne had applied for a Natural Resource Nitrogen Sensitive Areas (NRNSAs) grant from the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (MassDEP) in the fall; the town received the $100,000 grant in late January. One of the grant’s obligations is to spend the money to hire a consulting firm by the end of this fiscal year, which ended on June 30.

On July 7, the town administrator’s office had contacted MassDEP to inquire whether the Town of Bourne could extend the deadline; however, MassDEP said, “that is not possible.”

Describing it as “disappointing news,” McCollem said that “prior to this grant, grants were regularly and routinely extended. I was surprised to hear that they were not going to consider it…I think this is a change in the environment that we are working in.”

Board chairwoman Melissa A. Ferretti shared that she had observed that “a lot” of extension requests for grants were being denied.

In light of this change, McCollem emphasized a more strategic approach: “Before investing time and effort, we can make sure that we can send it without an extension.”

“This is a capacity issue,” McCollem noted, citing tight budgets and large workloads that the Town of Bourne is currently operating under as a reason for not being able to take advantage of the grant.

The next update provided by McCollem was that the town had released the request for qualifications (RFQ) for engineering and consulting services for the two watershed permits to the public.

Responses to the request are due by Friday, August 7, McCollem said. She added that the team reviewing submitted responses—Public Works Director Matthew Sawicki, Health Director Kaitlyn Shea, town engineer Timothy Lydon, Select Board member Jeanne L. Azarovitz and herself—will meet on the Monday leading up to the deadline to “touch base about the expectations and make sure that the review team has an understanding of everything.”

The board’s last order of business was to choose a goal statement to describe its watershed permit process, strategy and objectives. Ferretti had drafted two options: a short option and a longer option.

Ultimately, the board unanimously decided to choose the longer version: “The town will advance the watershed permit by completing required planning, coordination and compliance actions, and support long-term water quality protection. This includes refining our strategy, confirming responsibilities across departments, strengthening collaborations with regional partners and preparing materials needed for timely submission. The goal is to ensure the town meets all regulatory expectations while protecting local resources and maintaining a clear, organized path forward.”
